Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America


Praised by some as islands of efficiency in a sea of unprofessional,
politicized, and corrupt states, and criticized by others for remov-
ing wide-ranging areas of policy making from the democratic arena,
technocrats have become prominent and controversial actors in Latin
American politics. Nonelected state officials with advanced educations
from top universities, technocrats achieved considerable autonomy
from political and economic actors and exerted great influence over
their countries’ fates. This finding poses an intriguing paradox. These
experts lack an independent base of authority, such as that afforded
via popular election. They also lack the tenure enjoyed by professional
bureaucrats. What, then, explains the power of technocrats in demo­
cratic Latin America? And why do they enjoy and maintain greater
influence in some policy areas than in others? Through an in-depth
analysis of economic and health policy in Colombia from 1958 to 2013
and in Peru from 1980 to 2013, Technocracy and Democracy in Latin
America answers these and other questions about technocrats in Latin
America.

Eduardo Dargent is an associate professor of political science at
Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú. His main teaching and
research interests are comparative public policy and democratization,
and the state in the developing world. He has published in Comparative
Politics, the Journal of Latin American Studies, and the Journal of
Politics in Latin America.
Technocracy and Democracy in
Latin America
The Experts Running Government



      Eduardo Dargent
      Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú
32 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10013-2473, USA

Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of
education, learning, and research at the highest international levels of excellence.

www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781107059870
© Eduardo Dargent 2015
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2015
Printed in the United States of America
A catalog record for this publication is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication data
Dargent, Eduardo, 1974–
Technocracy and democracy in Latin America : the experts running
government / Eduardo Dargent.
   pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-107-05987-0 (hardback)
1. Latin America – Politics and government – 1948–1980. 2. Latin America – Politics
and government – 1980– 3. Technocracy. 4. Government executives – Latin
America. 5. Democracy – Latin America. 6. Latin America – Economic policy.
7. Medical policy – Latin America. I. Title.
JL960.D38 2015
320.98–dc23    2014033135
ISBN   978-1-107-05987-0 Hardback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of
URLs for external or third-party Internet Web sites referred to in this publication
and does not guarantee that any content on such Web sites is, or will remain,
accurate or appropriate.
Contents




List of Tables                                                     page vii
Acknowledgments                                                         ix

1   Introduction: Technocracy under Democracy                            1
    The Puzzle                                                           2
    The Argument in Brief                                                5
    Research Design                                                     11
    Definitions: Technocrats and Democracy                              13
    Theoretical Relevance: Power, Expertise, and Democracy              14
    Organization of the Book                                            17
2   Technocrats in Latin American Democracies: Agents or Actors?        19
    Political Agents                                                    20
    Agents of International Financial Institutions                      25
    Agents of Business                                                  28
    Conclusion: The Power of Experts                                    33
3   A Theory of Technocratic Autonomy                                   35
    The Source of Experts’ Autonomy: Knowledge Is Power                 36
    Determinants of Technical Autonomy                                  42
        The Politics of Policy                                          42
        Technical Aspects of Policy                                     53
    Technical Entrenchment and the Fall of Experts                      60
    Conclusion                                                          63
4   Economic Technocrats in Colombia (1958–2013)                        65
    Technocratic Emergence and Continuity                               66
    Technical Autonomy in Colombia                                      71




                                                                         v
vi                                                                        Contents

     Explaining Technocratic Autonomy in Colombia                              77
        Crafting Technocratic Autonomy in Colombia                             77
        Determinants of Technocratic Autonomy in Colombia                      81
     Conclusion                                                                88
5    Economic Technocrats in Peru (1980–1983; 1990–2013)                       90
     Economic Technocrats in the Eighties                                      91
     The Rise and Consolidation of Neoliberal Experts (1990–2013)              97
     Explaining Economic Technocratic Autonomy in Peru                        105
         MEF Experts’ Strategic Actions                                       105
         Determinants of Technical Entrenchment in the MEF                    107
     Conclusion                                                               112
6    Health Technocrats in Colombia (1966–1970; 1993–2013)                    114
     Health Experts during the National Front                                 115
     Ley 100 and “Team Change” (1993–2013)                                    119
     Explaining Technical Autonomy and Continuity in an
         Unlikely Policy Area                                                 125
         Politics of Policy Factors                                           127
         Technical Aspects of Policy Factors                                  130
     Conclusion                                                               132
7    Health Technocrats in Peru (1990–2002)                                   134
     The Health Ministry before the Reform                                    135
     The Emergence and Stability of Health Experts (1990–2002)                137
     Explaining Health Experts’ Limited Autonomy and Eventual Demise          143
         Positive Factors                                                     145
         Negative Factors                                                     147
     Conclusion                                                               150
8    Conclusion: Technocratic Autonomy, Its Limits, and Democracy
     in Latin America                                                         152
     The Fall of Experts                                                      156
     The Limits of Political Incentives and Structural Theories for the
         Analysis of Policy Making                                            161
     Practical Lessons for Policy Makers                                      163
     Technocrats, Democracy, and Beyond                                       165

Bibliography                                                                  169
Interviews                                                                    185
Index                                                                         193
Tables




1.1.   Technocratic Autonomy                                 page 6
1.2.   Episodes and Outcomes                                    10
3.1.   Political Costs of Poor Policy Performance               44
3.2.   Constellation of Stakeholders                            51
3.3.   Technical Complexity                                     54
3.4.   Technical Consensus                                      57
4.1.   Colombian Economic Officials (1958–2013)                 70
4.2.   Economic Advisers to the Monetary Board (1958–1991)      71
5.1.   Economic Ministers in Peru (1980–2013)                  101
7.1.   MINSA Health Infrastructure (1980–2002)                 141




                                                                vii
Acknowledgments




Some parts of this work (most notably sections of Chapters 2, 4, and 5) were
published in “Agents or Actors? Assessing the Autonomy of Economic Experts
in Colombia and Peru,” Comparative Politics, Vol. 43 No. 3 (April 2011).
   I have incurred many debts throughout the writing process. This book is
based on my doctoral thesis so, as you can imagine, there is a long list of indi-
viduals to whom I owe words of gratitude. First and foremost, I am grateful
for the generous support of my academic adviser, Kurt Weyland. Throughout
the years I spent working on my thesis, Kurt promptly returned everything I
presented to him with detailed and thoughtful comments. I truly appreciate his
generosity as an adviser, and I hope to be able to help my students in a similar
capacity. I am also grateful to other members of my dissertation committee:
Dan Brinks, Raúl Madrid, and Wendy Hunter. They provided me with invalu-
able insight and excellent feedback, even when I was no longer under their
tutorship. In general, the fantastic clout of Latin American specialists, profes-
sors, and students at the Department of Government at The University of Texas
at Austin helped craft the perfect environment for me to carry out this work.
   There are many other individuals in the Department of Government at UT
Austin who deserve acknowledgment for their inestimable support, including
Manuel Balan, Catherine Boone, Sandra Botero, Daniel Budny, Luis Camacho,
Annette Carlile, Henry Dietz, Laura Field, Austin Hart, Ilana Lifshitz, Robert
Moser, Rodrigo Nunes, Daniel Ryan, and Mary Slosar. All were generous
friends who provided support both inside and outside the classroom. More
generally, my research would not have been possible without a number of
grants and scholarships provided by institutions at UT Austin: the Department
of Government, the Teresa Lozano Long Institute of Latin American Studies,
and the College of Liberal Arts.
   I also would like to express my gratitude to the many individuals who
helped me during my research. Diverse academics, public officers, NGO


                                                                               ix
x                                                            Acknowledgments

activists, journalists, and, of course, technocrats, were generous with their
valuable time. There are too many to mention, so I will only briefly list some
here. In Colombia, Felipe Botero, Ralf Leiteritz, Rodolfo Masías, Carlo Nasi,
and Laura Wills from the Political Science Department of Universidad de Los
Andes provided me with numerous contacts and invaluable advice. Angelika
Rettberg, the director of the department, kindly organized two workshops cen-
tered on my work, an internal one with professors and a second one open to
the academic community. Both events helped me think through my research. In
FEDESARROLLO, Mauricio Cárdenas, Mauricio Santa María, and Alejandra
Gonzalez shared their knowledge about economics and public policy and pro-
vided me with valuable contacts. I also would like to give special thanks to
Juan Pablo Uribe, health expert of the Fundación Santa Fé de Bogotá, who was
patient enough to explain the Colombian health system, by far one of the most
daunting challenges in my work. Diana Rodríguez Franco was also a great
supporter, helping me fill in the holes in my previous research throughout this
past year. In Colombia, my utmost gratitude goes to the two individuals largely
responsible for my success in disentangling the political and technocratic cul-
ture of this fascinating country: Otto Morales Benites and Rodrigo Botero, a
politician and a technocrat, respectively, who went out of their way to support
me throughout this project, providing contacts, advice, and information. My
admiration for these two statesmen is enormous.
   In Peru, in addition to those I interviewed, I would like to recognize my
friends and colleagues and the administrative staff at the Pontificia Universidad
Católica del Perú (PUCP). Rolando Ames, Aldo Panfichi, and Catalina Romero
made me feel like a part of this institution from day one. Jorge Aragón, José
Carlos Orihuela, and Maritza Paredes provided inestimable information and
comments on different parts of my work. Among my technocratic friends, María
Inés Vásquez was a superb translator of “who is who” in the Peruvian state.
Not only did she provide me with contacts that would have otherwise taken
me months to find, but she also spent time learning about my interests and
suggesting promising avenues of research. Richard Webb and Milagros Mejía
from the Instituto del Perú of the Universidad San Martín gave me an office
during my first period of field research in Lima. They also organized a work-
shop where I discussed my preliminary findings in the country. The Consorcio
de Investigación Económica y Social (CIES) awarded me a research grant that
helped me conduct research in the Ministries of Economy and Health.
   Whether professors or PhD students, many other comparative scholars also
deepened my research and writing experience. Both Ezequiel Gonzales and
Jennifer Cyr conducted their field research at the same time as I did, which
allowed for much conversation and debate. Steve Levitsky spent a year in PUCP
while I was teaching there, and his energy and engagement became invalu-
able assets in our department. Juan Pablo Luna from Pontificia Universidad
Católica de Chile and his colleagues were kind enough to organize a book
Acknowledgments                                                                 xi

workshop to discuss this manuscript in June 2013. My friend Hillel Soifer is
a great academic who provides fabulous advice, and some of the names and
concepts in this work are a direct result of his creativity and generosity. Alberto
Vergara deserves a special word of recognition for the enormous support and
positive influence he provided in both my personal and academic life. It has
been more than two decades of friendship and collaboration since we started
our two-person reading group about political science and theory. I would also
like to thank Mary Sutcliffe Love, Aaron Watanabe, and Annette Wren, all of
whom have helped me edit my Spanglish at different points throughout the
process. Of course, all errors within this book are my responsibility.
   Last but not least, my family provided much needed emotional support.
Both my mother, Leticia Bocanegra, and father, Eduardo Dargent Chamot,
have encouraged me to follow my academic interests since early childhood
and have always supported my decisions. My brother Felipe, the real scientist
in the family, and Gabriela Capurro, my bright and charming sister-in-law, are
also important members of this tight support group. My generous and car-
ing Colombian and Peruvian families gave me more encouragement than they
could imagine. Lastly, my wife Paula Muñoz deserves to be mentioned in each
of these paragraphs. A colleague, a friend, a travel companion, and above all a
loving partner, there is more of Paula in this work than I can convey. Her love,
care, intelligence, and sensibility have seen me through this trying adventure,
one of many more to come.
1

Introduction
Technocracy under Democracy




In June 2005, Peruvian President Alejandro Toledo (2001–2006) complained
bitterly about a “silent opposition” that prevented him from fulfilling his elec-
toral promises. With his approval ratings in the low twenties and the 2006
general election approaching, Toledo had good reason to be worried. Perú
Posible, his political party, was expected to lose all but two of its thirty-five
congressional seats (30 percent of Congress) in the election, while its prospects
for the regional and municipal elections scheduled for later that year were sim-
ilarly bleak. Surprisingly, Toledo saw this “silent opposition” operating within
the executive branch. According to the president, it consisted of a group of
“insensitive bureaucrats” (burócratas insensibles) in the Ministry of Economy
and Finance (MEF) that tied his hands and delayed public investment even
in times of significant economic growth.1 Some months before leaving office,
Toledo told his economic team, “without technocrats I would have done
much more.” His two-time economic minister, and then cabinet chief, Pedro
Pablo Kuczynski, answered playfully: “The ‘insensitive technocrats’ gave you
6.5 percent GDP growth per year, so stop whining.”2
    Why did Toledo publicly complain about his economic technocrats while
giving them control over the national budget? If they were such an obstacle
for him, why did he not just fire them? The president could have appointed
members of his party to economic institutions and thereby have easily increased
public investment in order to enhance Perú Posible’s electoral chances. After
all, these técnicos were mostly mere appointees without bureaucratic tenure.
Toledo’s seemingly surprising decision to keep technocrats in their positions was
not exceptional: for more than twenty years, economic technocrats have been
in charge of economic policy in Peru. Despite their populist campaign styles,


1
    La República, “Toledo Critica a Funcionarios ‘Intermedios’ de su Gobierno,” June 12, 2005.
2
    Caretas, “A Doce Mil Pies,” February 9, 2006.

                                                                                                 1
2                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

Toledo’s successors, Alan García (2006–2011) and Ollanta Humala (2011–),
kept similarly technically trained individuals in control of economic policy.
    Nor was Toledo’s decision an exception by regional standards. Beginning in
the 1980s and intensifying during the neoliberal reform period of the 1990s,
Latin American countries witnessed the appointment of economic technocrats
to key state positions where, to this day, they promote and implement poli-
cies they prefer while frequently vetoing those they oppose. Praised by some
as islands of efficiency in otherwise unprofessional, politicized, and corrupt
states, and criticized by others for removing wide-ranging areas of policy mak-
ing from the democratic arena, economic technocrats have become prominent
and controversial actors in Latin American politics (P. Silva 1991; Dominguez
1997; Conaghan and Malloy 1994; Teichman 1997; Centeno and Silva 1998;
Babb 2005; Montecinos 2005). Some commentators have even discussed the
appearance in the region of what they call “technocratic democracies,” defined
as regimes where the “framing of policy alternatives is largely in the hands of
experts” (Centeno and Silva 1998, 11).
    Nonetheless, the power wielded by economic experts is not always matched
by technocrats elsewhere in the state. Between 1993 and 2002, a group of
health policy technocrats accumulated significant influence within the Peruvian
Ministry of Health (Ministerio de Salud–MINSA). Within a ministry character-
ized by immobility and bureaucratic weakness, these experts enacted significant
reforms, often without direct involvement from politicians. These technocrats
were, however, finally dismissed when the externally funded reform projects
they oversaw ran out of funds and Toledo’s first health minister rejected their
approach to public health. In clear contrast to the ensuing media spectacle every
time the president appoints a new finance minister, these events went largely
unnoticed by politicians and the press. A similar pattern of economic experts,
enjoying more job stability than do technocrats in other areas such as health
policy, is also observed in Colombia and other Latin American countries.
    Why have economic experts in the MEF achieved considerable autonomy
and influence for two decades in Peru while health experts failed to gain sta-
bility in MINSA? Where does experts’ power over policy making come from if
they lack an independent base of authority, such as that afforded via popular
election, or the tenure enjoyed by professional bureaucrats? Why do techno-
cratic reform teams enjoy and maintain greater autonomy in certain policy
areas than in others? More broadly, are these non-elected state officials a pos-
itive or negative influence on democracy in the region? Through an in-depth
analysis of technocratic experiences in economic and health policy in Colombia
from 1958 to 2013 and in Peru from 1980 to 2013, this book aims to answer
these and other questions about technocrats in Latin America.

The Puzzle
Technocrats are long-standing actors in Latin America. Appointing well-
qualified individuals to state positions is a way to achieve greater capacity
Introduction                                                                      3

than the region’s traditionally weak bureaucracies could provide (Evans 1992,
141; Geddes 1994). Historically, técnicos were associated with authoritarian
and semi-authoritarian regimes. Under these regimes, experts were insulated
from popular and electoral pressures, which allowed for relatively quick and
unimpeded implementation of their preferred policies. For example, Guillermo
O’Donnell’s concept of bureaucratic authoritarianism highlighted the impor-
tance of high-ranking bureaucrats in the military governments of the Southern
Cone during the 1970s (O’Donnell 1973; Collier 1979; Biglaiser 2002). Experts
also implemented ambitious reforms during the military governments of the
1960s and 1970s in Brazil (Geddes 1990; Hagopian 1994). Further examples
include the highly trained bureaucrats who challenged landed and industrial
elites under Peru’s military regime following the 1968 “revolution from above,”
(Stepan 1978; Trimberger 1978); the market-oriented “Chicago Boys” behind
Augusto Pinochet’s neoliberal transformation of Chile (O’Brien and Rodick
1983; P. Silva 1991); and, more recently, the experts linked to the hegemonic
Partido Revolucionario Institucional (PRI) who carried out market reforms
during Carlos Salinas’s (1988–1994) and Ernesto Zedillo’s (1994–2000) presi-
dencies in Mexico (Centeno 1994; Teichman 1997; Babb 2005).
    For most of the past century, however, technical expertise seemed scarce in
Latin American democracies. Patronage-driven politicians in democratic Latin
America were frequently unwilling to create areas of technical competence that
would impose restraints on their use of resources (Malloy 1992; Webb 1994).
However, since the 1960s, economic technocrats have become important actors
in many Latin American democracies, especially during recent periods of neo-
liberal reform. In Colombia, technocrats have been key actors since the late
1950s when President Alberto Lleras Camargo (1958–1962), and more clearly,
President Carlos Lleras Restrepo (1966–1970), strengthened the executive
branch by appointing experts in several economic institutions. More recently,
experts became top players in Peruvian politics during Alberto Fujimori’s
regime (1990–2000). Técnicos have also remained key policy makers in Chile
and Brazil following the countries’ democratic transitions from authoritarian
rule in the late 1980s (P. Silva 2008). Similarly, the PRI’s failure to maintain its
electoral hegemony in 2000 did not reduce the importance of economic experts
in the Mexican state (Babb 2005).
    Experts’ increased role under democratic regimes has stimulated a lively
theoretical debate about their influence in policy making and effective
­independence from other sociopolitical players, especially politicians, inter-
 national financial institutions (IFIs), and business interests. What explains the
 relevance of experts in contemporary Latin American democracies? Is their
 power derived from other actors or do they enjoy autonomy? Three instru-
 mentalist theories locate the source of technocrats’ influence in other political
 or economic actors. These instrumentalist theories conclude that técnicos are
 “merely representatives or the most visible manifestation of deeper or more
 structural determinacies; technocrats are not where the action is” (Centeno
 and Silva 1998, 2).
4                                         Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

   As discussed in Chapter 2, these instrumentalist theories fail to capture the
importance of experts in the region. Even if these theories provide important
insights into the role of technocrats, they ultimately underestimate the auton-
omy experts possess from their alleged principals and the capacity to advance
their own policy goals. Following previous works, I propose that technocrats
are better conceptualized as autonomous actors (Centeno and Silva 1998;
P. Silva 2008). Experts fulfill the most influential definition of state autonomy
in the comparative politics literature: “formulate and pursue goals that are not
simply reflective of the demands or interests of social groups, classes, or soci-
ety” (Skocpol 1985, 9).
   In the following pages, I demonstrate how technocratic reform teams fre-
quently adopt their own policy preferences, which they advance with relative
success, even against the interests of other powerful actors, including their
democratically elected superiors. In some policy areas, the implementation
of experts’ preferred policies significantly alters society, deeply transforming
institutional arrangements and/or the distribution of resources among social
groups.3 Furthermore, in some areas técnicos even achieve entrenchment –
meaning incumbent politicians are informally forced to appoint officials in
that policy area with similar levels of training and policy preferences – that
endures over time. Appointing unqualified individuals in directive positions
for these policy areas carries high political costs for the incumbent. As such,
these highly educated state officials meet the criteria for autonomy specified in
previous studies of states, international organizations, and bureaucratic agen-
cies (Krasner 1984; Brint 1990, 369; Centeno 1993, 322–323; Barnett and
Finnemore 1999; Carpenter 2001, 15).
   These findings pose an intriguing paradox. Experts lack an independent base
of power, such as that afforded via popular election, or institutional protections
as in the case of certain state bodies (courts, central banks, etc.). They also lack
the tenure enjoyed by professional bureaucrats because usually they are merely
appointees. Formally, most experts remain highly dependent on politicians for
their positions, as they “can be fired in a matter of minutes” (Schneider 1998,
78). How, then, can technocrats be autonomous and influential in their policy
areas? What is the source of their power? Moreover, why does this autonomy
vary across policy sectors and even within the same policy sector over time?
   Through an in-depth analysis of economic and health technocrats in
Colombia and Peru, I propose a theory of technocratic autonomy that develops
and refines our understanding of the power of experts in the region. This theory
explains why experts can achieve significant autonomy, illuminates the deter-
minants of variation in the degree of this autonomy across these policy areas
and across time, and elucidates why technocratic power becomes entrenched in
certain areas, resulting in experts essentially running government within their


3
    Brint uses these criteria to highlight the power of bureaucratic actors (Brint 1990, 369).
Introduction                                                                    5

policy domains. This theory also provides insights into the conditions that can
lead to the fall of such powerful state officials. In this introductory chapter,
I briefly present this theory concerning technocrats in Latin America. Next,
I explain the theoretical relevance of this analysis. I conclude by specifying two
central concepts in this work – technocrats and democracy– and providing an
overview of the book.


The Argument in Brief
Technocrats’ main source of autonomy is expertise, which legitimizes ­técnicos
and their preferred policies while also giving them considerable leverage over
sociopolitical actors. Technocrats are usually appointed to deal with complex
issues that políticos lack the knowledge to successfully address. My study
offers evidence of how, once in place, technical reform teams often adopt deci-
sions that diverge from politicians’ initial mandates and advance their own
policy preferences in ways their political superiors do not expect. Experts fre-
quently act as agenda setters, drafting and implementing policies that affect the
interests of political and social actors. Technical knowledge provides its bearer
considerable power in the Latin American state, much more power than is rec-
ognized by other theoretical perspectives.
   By using their knowledge to make public policy increasingly sophisticated,
technocrats become essential to políticos and other socioeconomic actors who,
without experts, could not manage the increasingly complex state. This grad-
ual process itself reinforces the position of técnicos (Grindle 1977, 423; Haas
1982, 4; Centeno 1993, 316; Palacios 2001). But my findings also show that
technocrats are not passive in this process. Experts frequently use their knowl-
edge to purposively exclude less-technically trained actors from policy mak-
ing, divert political and socioeconomic pressures, build informal and formal
institutions that guarantee their positions’ stability, and form alliances with
other actors to advance their technical preferences. Through these strategies,
experts actively aim to build technocratic autonomy and achieve continuity in
their positions.
   The strength of this autonomy, however, varies across policy sectors. In some
policy areas experts enjoy high autonomy, successfully marginalizing other
actors from policy making, advancing their preferences, and adopting informal
or formal rules that make technical expertise a necessary requirement for recruit-
ment into the state. Under these facilitating conditions, experts are also more
likely to entrench their power; technocrats gradually raise the political costs
of appointing nontechnical individuals, thereby informally ­constraining even
new incumbents to appoint officials with similarly high technical credentials.
Only considerable crises linked to the experts’ performance or abrupt political
changes can now reduce technical control over these areas. By contrast, in policy
sectors where this autonomy is lower, technocrats are restrained from advanc-
ing their preferences and remain more vulnerable to clashes with politicians and
6                                       Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

table 1.1. Technocratic Autonomy

                    Limiting External         Advancement of            Continuity/
                    Intrusion                 Policy Preferences        Entrenchment

High technocratic   Significant capacity      Significant success       More likely. Politicians
  autonomy             to resist/veto the        in advancing             are informally
                       intrusion of other        technocrats’             constrained to
                       actors over policy        policy preferences,      maintain a high
                       making, even              including projects       technical level in these
                       including experts’        not necessarily          areas. Incumbents
                       political superiors.      supported by their       may choose experts
                                                 political superiors.     with different policy
                                                                          perspectives, but high
                                                                          technical credentials
                                                                          are a necessary
                                                                          condition for
                                                                          appointment.
Low technocratic    Vulnerable to clashes     Higher difficulties to    Less Likely. Politicians
  autonomy            with politicians          advance experts’          have more latitude
                      and socioeconomic         policy projects,          to dismiss experts,
                      actors.                   especially when           enhance political
                                                these are not             control, and
                                                supported by the          appoint nontechnical
                                                incumbent.                cadres.




other actors. Furthermore, in these policy areas, the passage of time alone does
not necessarily guarantee technical entrenchment. New incumbents, or new
ministers, are not required to respect technical continuity. Table 1.1. presents
the differences between instances of high and low autonomy.
   I propose that four factors explain the variation in the strength of techni-
cal autonomy found across policy sectors, and over time, in the same policy
sectors. The first two are related to what I refer to as “the politics of policy,”
while the second two are related to the technical aspects of policy. These first
two factors carry most of the weight to explain this variation: they indicate
which policy areas are more likely and less likely cases of technocratic auton-
omy. These two factors enhance the need for technical expertise within a pol-
icy area and crucially limit the incumbent’s capacity to freely manipulate, or
drastically reduce, technical expertise once established. The first two factors
are as follows:
   The Cost to the Incumbent of Poor Policy Performance – The most common
threat to experts’ autonomy in Latin America is the president’s or ruling-party’s
interest in controlling the policy sector where experts are appointed. Although
experts are often appointed to carry out politicians’ policy goals, clashes inev-
itably arise, especially when a new executive takes office. A crucial test for
technical autonomy is surviving these disagreements with political patrons.
Introduction                                                                                         7

What prevents politicians from firing experts, and why are they constrained
to appointing only similarly technically trained cadres in certain policy areas?
Part of the answer lies in the potential costs of intrusion. In policy areas where
poor decisions can hurt the population and societal actors, creating negative
political consequences, the costs of political meddling are prohibitively high;
this is especially true if the negative consequences are evident in the short term,
hurt a great number of citizens, affect high and middle classes, and are easily
attributable to the political incumbent. On the other hand, the benefits to the
incumbent for controlling a policy area are mainly increased access to patron-
age resources. Politicians are much more likely to forego patronage resources if
the politicians themselves can be held responsible for the consequences of pol-
icy errors. However, if policy areas are of little interest to the public or societal
actors, politicians face lower costs when replacing experts or intruding in exist-
ing technical areas. These political costs may increase over time because of the
feedback effects of experts’ policies or because of events that enhance public
awareness of the consequences of poor policy, such as a political or economic
crisis, thus contributing to technical continuity and entrenchment.
    Plural and Balanced Constellation of Stakeholders4 – Some types of poli-
cies affect the interests of multiple politically powerful, economic, and inter-
national actors, while others attract the attention of only a few stakeholders
with ­limited political influence. If there is only one prominent actor with inter-
ests in a policy sector, this actor has significant power to block technical poli-
cies affecting its interests. But if there is competition between several powerful
stakeholders, this balanced arrangement provides experts with more space to
make their own choices. Ideally, stakeholders would like direct control of a
policy area. When that is not possible, they prefer ceding control to techno-
crats rather than to competing actors, especially when those competing actors
are politicians. These stakeholders see technocrats as a reasonable “second
best” option that provides an informal check against intrusion by other actors.
Competing stakeholders not only support technocrats as an insurance policy
against other actors’ policies, butexperts can also use these powerful actors as
allies to advance technical preferences on those occasions when stakeholders’
interests coincide with their own. This factor is also crucial to explain tech-
nocratic entrenchment. Building upon North’s dictum that institutions gain
stability “only if they are supported by organizations with an interest in their
perpetuation” (North 1995, 25), I propose that powerful political and economic
actors contribute to technical entrenchment. Over time, these actors come to


4
    As discussed more thoroughly in Chapter 3, I use the term “stakeholder” in a broader way than
    is usually used in public policy theory, which generally reserves the term for citizens, interest
    groups, or civil society actors affected by policies adopted in a policy sector. Here, in contrast,
    “stakeholders” refer to political, international, and socioeconomic actors whose interests are
    affected by policy making. IFIs or even the political opposition will also be considered stakehold-
    ers for my theory.
8                                       Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

perceive experts as guarantors who maintain technical policy and ­predictable
rules and thus have an even greater stake in the experts’ continuity.5 In areas
where such stakeholders do not exist, technical entrenchment will be more dif-
ficult because the passage of time alone does not have similar positive feedback
effects and experts remain vulnerable to clashes with politicians.
    These two factors determine, to a considerable degree, the variation in tech-
nocratic autonomy within state agencies – in my examples, between high tech-
nocratic autonomy in economic policy and low autonomy in health policy.
Nonetheless, two additional factors related to the technical aspects of policy
also contribute to explain this variation. These two factors are not as important
as the previous two in regard to the initial technical appointment or to limit
political intrusion once technocrats emerge within a policy area. Nonetheless,
when high, these factors enhance technical autonomy by further limiting polit-
ical intrusion into policy areas. Thus, these factors help to explain why techno-
cratic autonomy emerges and achieves continuity in less likely policy areas, and
why it fails to do so in others where it would seem likely.
    Policy Complexity – A third factor influencing variation in technical auton-
omy is the level of technical specialization required in order to understand
policy options within a given issue. Policy sectors can be highly technical,
or become so because of changes in the professional, academic, and policy
­communities. Policy complexity enhances autonomy by increasing both the
 information asymmetry between experts and politicians, and the uncertainty
 about the likely consequences of certain policies. Due to their lack of technical
 understanding, politicians rely heavily on experts to make these assessments,
 thereby reducing their own control over policy decisions.
    Expert Consensus – This factor refers to the degree of agreement among
 experts on “correct” policy in a given area. In policy sectors where expert con-
 sensus about what constitutes adequate policy already exists, there is less space
 for political intrusion. Consensus enhances technical experts’ autonomy by
 making technical preferences appear legitimate and reasonable while ruling
 out challenges from other technically trained individuals. When such a consen-
 sus exists, there may be discussion about policy details or priorities, but there
 is no debate among experts about the broad parameters of adequate policy.
 Technical consensus, then, provides experts with “an authoritative claim to
 policy-relevant knowledge within that domain or issue area” (Haas 1992, 3).
 Lacking fundamental disagreements among experts, it is more difficult for
 politicians to circumvent technical advice and policy prescriptions by replacing
 entire technical cadres with others holding preferences closer to their own. The
 lack of such divides forces politicians to accept the experts’ views.
    In the following chapters, I show how these factors determine in which ­policy
 areas experts are more likely to acquire technical autonomy and maintain it


5
    About feedback effects, see Pierson 1994, 42–50; 2000.
Introduction                                                                    9

over time, and where technocrats are likely to remain weak and vulnerable to
political intrusion. These factors explain the varied political fates of the three
groups of economic experts (Colombia 1958–2013; Peru 1980–1983; Peru
1990–2013) and the three groups of health experts (Colombia 1966–1970;
Colombia 1993–2013; Peru 1990–2002) studied in this book, which are sum-
marized in Table 1.2.
   In two of the three instances of economic policy making, Colombia 1958–
2013 and Peru 1990–2013, all of these favorable conditions were present.
Both of these cases show high levels of technical autonomy and significant
continuity over time. A third economic episode (Peru 1980–1983) provides
intermediate findings in a “more likely” area for technical autonomy. An
unbalanced constellation of stakeholders and a lack of awareness of the polit-
ical costs of profligate economic policy, combined with a lack of technical
consensus, explain the fall of MEF experts in this earlier episode of economic
technocracy.
   The three health policy episodes show a substantial degree of autonomy for
a sector that was traditionally technically weak. Reform teams were success-
ful in implementing significant changes in the ministry. But the unfavorable
conditions related to health policy explain why in two of my three health pol-
icy cases – Colombia 1966–1970 and Peru 1990–2002 – technical autonomy
eventually declined and, despite remaining at intermediate levels in the third
case, Colombia 1993–2013, continues to experience more challenges than in
economic areas. In this last episode, experts gained significant leverage dur-
ing an ambitious process of reform that radically transformed the Colombian
health system. The factors in my framework, particularly the costs of policy
failure and those related to expert knowledge, help explain this intermediate
outcome. First, creating a single national health system that included both the
formally employed and poor citizens raised the costs of poor health policy
outcomes for politicians. Also, due to the privatization of health care provi-
sion, new stakeholders emerged in the health sector that balanced the power
of the Executive. Finally, health policy became more technical than it was in
the past because of the spread of the health economics approach (discussed
in Chapter 6).
   There are also limits to this technocratic power. To demonstrate how the
influence of well-entrenched technical policy makers can fade, I briefly dis-
cuss in the conclusion cases from Argentina, Bolivia, and Venezuela where this
occurred. In these instances, not only did new policy makers enter the govern-
ment bringing new priorities, but the overall level of technical power declined
in these sectors. New appointees were more dependent on politicians. This
occurred when a crisis delegitimized technical policy recipes, thus reducing
the political cost of firing experts and/or when an abrupt change of political
power provided politicians with a strong popular mandate that allowed them
to drastically reduce the experts’ power. The factors I highlight help to explain
the rise, stabilization, and fall of technocrats in the region.
10




     table 1.2. Episodes and Outcomes

     Episodes Factors     Economy:       Economy: Peru     Economy: Peru    Health: Colombia      Health: Colombia   Health: Peru
                          Colombia       (1990–2013)       (1980–1983)      (1993–2013)           (1966–1970)        (1990–2002)
                          (1958–2013)
     Politics of policy
     Cost of bad policy High             High              Medium/high      Low first, then       Low                Low
       performance                                                            medium due to
                                                                              policy feedback
                                                                              effects
     Constellation of     Plural and     Plural and        Plural and       Dominant actor but    Dominant actor     Dominant actor,
       stakeholders         balanced       balanced          unbalanced       more plural after                       but balanced
                                                                              the reforms                             by IFIs during
                                                                                                                      the 1990s
     Technical aspects of policy
     Complexity           High           High              High             Medium                Low                Medium
     Expert consensus     High           High              Low              Low                   Low                Low
     Outcome              High autonomy, High autonomy,    Medium           Medium autonomy,      Low autonomy, no   Medium/ low
                            technical      technical        autonomy, no     meaningful             entrenchment.     autonomy, no
                            entrenchment   entrenchment.    entrenchment.    continuity.                              entrenchment.
Introduction                                                                                     11


Research Design
To understand the autonomy of technocrats, I compare the implications of
instrumentalist explanations and those of my own theory against evidence
from economic and health agencies in Colombia from 1958 to 2013 and in
Peru from 1980 to 2013. Despite some shared background conditions, Peru
and Colombia are rather different cases within the region in regard to several
factors that could, in principle, impact the emergence, strength, and autonomy
of a “technocracy.” For instance, técnicos arose in these countries in different
time periods with distinct economic and political conditions, such as a deep
economic crisis in Peru and a strong party system in Colombia. If similar find-
ings apply across such relatively different settings, we can assume that they
speak to other Latin American countries more broadly.
   The understudied case of the Colombian economic technocracy is well
suited for assessing technical power. Colombian technocrats emerged in the
late 1950s when there was neither a severe hyperinflationary crisis nor dom-
inant policy paradigm, such as neoliberalism, in the region. Thus we have to
look beyond conjectural causes to explain the emergence of this technocracy.
Further, we cannot attribute this strength to relatively weak political actors, as
Colombian technocrats coexisted with well-organized parties for more than
forty years. As the Colombian example shows, technical autonomy can live
alongside strong and clientelistic patronage-based political parties.6
   In each of the six episodes I explore, I document how and why experts’
reform teams reached their positions within the state. Then I demonstrate
experts’ autonomy by highlighting how their preferences differed from those
of other powerful actors, sometimes including their own political superiors. To
further substantiate these claims, in each episode I discuss technical policy ini-
tiatives and their implementation, as well as the experts’ veto power over other
actors’ initiatives. Finally, I show how the identified factors operated in order
to explain the outcomes in each episode.
   My focus is on executive agencies in which experts, in formal terms, depend
on politicians in order to keep their positions. The reason I have not included
formally insulated institutions where expertise is also found, such as central
banks or regulatory agencies, is the difficulty in determining how much these
formal institutional protections account for technical experts’ autonomy. In
this respect, I am focusing on “least likely cases” (in formal institutional terms)
for gaining technical autonomy. If technocrats are autonomous where they lack
formal protections, it is safe to assume that they are more likely to have such

6
    Clientelistic linkages between politicians and citizens “are based on direct material inducements
    targeted to individuals and small groups of citizens whom politicians know to be highly respon-
    sive to such side-payments and willing to surrender their vote for the right price” (Kitschelt
    and Wilkinson 2007, 2). In this work I’ll interchange the terms clientelism and patronage as
    synonymous.
12                                         Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

autonomy in areas dealing with similar policy issues that do enjoy institutional
protections.
   The perceived durability of the Peruvian and Colombian economic tech-
nocracies may create the impression that the continuity seen within these
technical areas is above the influence of changes in political or economic factors.
To show the limits of even strong technocracies in the region, in the conclud-
ing chapter I review three shadow cases – Argentina, Bolivia, and Venezuela –
where established technocrats lost power. I illustrate how abrupt changes in
the two politics of policy factors identified in my theory explain the experts’
demise in these instances.
   This book addresses two common problems in previous studies of techno-
crats in Latin America. First, this work presents a cross-temporal analysis of
technocratic involvement in policy making. Most previous analyses of experts’
actions within policy sectors employ a “static approach” (Centeno 1993, 316).7
These investigations resemble a snapshot – an image – of a given moment
that does not document variation over time. Their conclusions, then, may only
apply to that precise moment. A political-incentives perspective, for example,
can dismiss brief spells of technical autonomy under crisis conditions as excep-
tions to “politics as usual.” Consequently, some perspective across time, as the
one offered in the following pages, is important for properly assessing compet-
ing instrumentalist theories as well as my own.
   Second, by comparing two policy sectors, economy and health, this work also
differs from previous studies that have focused almost exclusively on economic
experts (P. Silva 1991; Conaghan and Malloy 1994; Centeno 1994; Teichman
1997; Centeno and Silva 1998; Conaghan 1998; Santiso and Whitehead
2006). This narrow focus seems inadequate if we want to develop a more gen-
eral picture of experts’ roles in contemporary Latin America. As mentioned,
I propose that there are particular social and economic conditions surround-
ing economic policy that make certain policy areas “more likely” cases for
technocratic autonomy. Contrasting economic and health policy allows me to
precisely highlight these differences. Health officials are expected to have spe-
cialized knowledge in public health in order to face existing and forthcoming
challenges, and to guarantee an efficient allocation of resources. Thus, health
is a policy area in which technical expertise should also be a crucial criterion
for appointment but where, however, technical autonomy is much less likely
to emerge and entrench than it is in economic sectors. Comparing policy areas
within the state allows for an exploration of the causes that explain the varia-
tion in technocratic autonomy across these areas.
   Finally, my work draws on three sources of information. First, I conducted
interviews with técnicos, politicians, IFI officials, business leaders, and civil
society actors. A total of 142 individuals were interviewed: 98 in Peru and 44

7
    An exception is P. Silva 2008. Silva’s book is a long-term and detailed analysis of technical policy
    making in Chile’s history.
Introduction                                                                                           13

in Colombia. These interviewees include 26 individuals with current or past
ministerial-level positions, such as ministers of finance or health (four were
appointed ministers after being interviewed). In Colombia, I had the good for-
tune to interview former Presidents César Gaviria (1990–1994) and Ernesto
Samper (1994–1998). Second, I reviewed official policy documents and press
archives regarding relevant events involving experts and the other sociopolit-
ical actors in both countries. Policy projects, political statements, and press
declarations helped to document the preferences of these diverse actors. Third,
I collected biographical information on cabinet-level economic officials from
official archives and other sources in order to document the experts’ career
paths. Although this information was incomplete in some cases, the biogra-
phies show clear trends that allow for valid generalizations.
   A comparative historical analysis of the work of experts in two policy sec-
tors fills an important gap in the study of Latin American politics. It has been
observed that “given their importance, it is surprising how little has been writ-
ten in Latin America about experts and their political roles” and also that “no
systemic and explicitly comparative analysis of these actors has been done”
(Centeno and Silva 1998, 1–2). Through a comparative historical investiga-
tion of Colombia and Peru across two policy spheres, I assess the soundness of
previous findings about experts in the region, and propose new, more robust
results and arguments.


Definitions: Technocrats and Democracy
“Who are technocrats?” has long been a disputed question in comparative poli-
tics, because they cannot be defined by easily discernible criteria such as level of
education, area of expertise, position within the state, lack of ­political ties, etc.
(Grindle 1977; Centeno 1993). There is broad agreement among academics,
however, that what distinguishes experts from other actors, such as politicians
or bureaucrats, is their higher level of expertise (Centeno and Silva 1998, 2;
Teichman 1997, 32), specifically in applied sciences such as economics, engi-
neering, agronomy, or health policy (Putnam 1977, 384).
   David Collier’s classic definition of technocrats captures this distinctive char-
acteristic: “Individuals with a high level of specialized academic training which
serves as a principal criterion on the basis of which they are selected to occupy
key decision-making or advisory roles in large, complex organizations – both
public and private” (Collier 1979, 403).8 This criterion of expertise not only
distinguishes experts from politicians and most bureaucrats, but also includes

8
    Similarly, other definitions highlight expertise as the main criterion of selection: “personnel who use
    their claim to knowledge (as opposed to representation or authoritarian control) to affirm their right
    to rule” (Centeno and Silva 1998, 2); “highly educated bureaucrats, most commonly with graduate
    degrees in such fields as economics or public administration in U.S. Universities” (Teichman 1997,
    32); or “highly educated, professionally trained policy makers” (Williams 2006, 119).
14                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

as experts lower-ranking officials with high technical skills (e.g., advisers and
consultants). Diverging from Collier, however, I refer only to individuals who
occupy public decision-making or advisory positions and not to individuals in
the private sector. Out of the 142 individuals interviewed in both countries, 78
shared these characteristics.
   In regard to the political regime type in which contemporary technocrats
operate, I adopt a procedural concept of democracy. Following studies on dem-
ocratic transitions, such a definition disaggregates regime type from regime
quality (e.g., excluding “quality of democracy” measures like high electoral
participation, effective socioeconomic rights, etc.). However, the definition has
to be broad enough to include the effective respect for political rights that allow
for meaningful competition for power. Democracy, then, is defined as “a set of
institutions that, in the context of guarantees of political freedoms, permits the
entire adult population to choose their leading decision-makers in competitive,
honest, regularly scheduled elections and to advance their interests and ideas
through peaceful individual or collective action” (Weyland 1996, 8).
   According to this definition, both Colombia and Peru were democratic for a
significant majority of the periods under study, allowing for a proper assessment
of experts’ role in democracies. At the same time, both countries experienced
episodes of either restricted democracy or, in the case of Peru, authoritarian
government, which allows for an examination of technical power under non-
democratic regimes as well.
   Colombia’s National Front political pact restricted electoral competition
for sixteen years between 1958 and 1974. The two traditional parties agreed
to run a single candidate, alternating between parties, while all other elected
positions were shared equally. Nonetheless, third parties could compete against
the Front’s candidate if they registered themselves as “liberal” or “conserva-
tive,” even if they had no real attachments to these parties. While the National
Front period fails to meet our procedural definition of democracy due to its
limited contestation, Colombian politics during the time remained quite com-
petitive, especially when compared to other Latin American countries during
those years (Wilde 1978). Peru, on the other hand, was democratic from 1980
to April 1992, when Fujimori’s coup suspended democracy until new elections
were held in November of that year. Later in the decade (1997–2000), the
regime restricted some liberties in order to gain reelection, eroding the demo-
cratic standard. Since 2000, when Fujimori fled office because of a corruption
scandal, democracy in Peru has remained competitive.

Theoretical Relevance: Power,
Expertise, and Democracy
The present study of technocratic roles and modes of operation in Latin America
has significant implications for comparative politics. First, my evaluation of the
power of social and political actors in Latin America suggests limits on existing
Introduction                                                                      15

instrumentalist explanations for the role of technocrats. While these theories
propose that technocratic power results from one dominant actor – politicians,
IFIs, or business interests – that uses experts as a tool to implement their pre-
ferred policies, my findings show that experts frequently act autonomously,
trumping the interests of influential political and economic actors.
     These results demonstrate the importance of certain state actors for the
analysis of politics in Latin America (Weyland 2002a, 75). Bureaucratic weak-
ness has led some to theorize the state as a playing field for political or eco-
nomic forces. This image is misleading. As this work shows, some state actors,
such as technocrats, can quite frequently constrain and affect the outcome of
competition between these political and socioeconomic forces.
     At the same time, by analyzing different policy areas, the book systemati-
cally explores the different factors that condition experts’ power across the state.
Looking closely at the interaction of technocrats with other political and eco-
nomic actors allows me to specify the mechanisms that make expertise an effec-
tive source of political influence in Latin American democracies, its variation
across policy areas, and the limits of such political resource. In sum, “technocratic
autonomy” constitutes a valuable concept for the study of politics in the region.
     Second, and closely related to the previous point, studying the role of
­técnicos as policy makers calls attention to the “output” side of politics, an
 often neglected topic in political science. While studies of the “input” side of
 politics examining parties, civil society, and social movements in Latin America
 have been common in recent decades, there have been fewer investigations
 of political outcomes. The “output” side of politics deserves more attention
 because it allows us to assess the power of sociopolitical actors (Carpenter
 2001, 11; Weyland 2002b, 66; 2006, 11–14). Furthermore, as this book illus-
 trates, policy output can shape politics in dramatic ways.
     A third contribution of my analysis is that it helps explain the oft-noted
 variation of capacity within Latin American states, with some areas resembling
 professional sectors of developed states while others remain weak and inef-
 fective. My theory provides insights about the likelihood of technical agencies
 establishing their authority, and why this likelihood is higher in policy areas
 such as economics than in others such as health. As Guillermo O’Donnell wrote
 almost two decades ago, “It says a lot about actual policy priorities that, while
 in several countries efforts have been recently made to enhance the economic
 policy-making area of the state, except for Chile, to my knowledge, no effort
 has been made in relation to the social policy area of the state” (O’Donnell
 1996, 9). Although O’Donnell’s words are not as true today as they were when
 first enunciated, this point still remains relevant for several Latin American
 countries. By looking at different policy areas and their dissimilar relevance
 for political and economic actors, the following pages delve into the reasons
 behind these differential priorities.
     Finally, my work has implications for debates about the quality of Latin
 American democracies in which technocratic influence is often regarded as
16                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

detrimental (Centeno 1993; Conaghan and Malloy 1994; Teichman 1997;
Centeno and Silva 1998). The argument is that experts may tie the hands
of even reformist politicians by undemocratically limiting the set of policy
options. Therefore, public policy is no longer a matter of electoral choice, but
decided by the preferences of technical elites or the powerful actors they alleg-
edly represent. By assessing the ability of technocrats to trump political prefer-
ences under democracy, I focus on one of the most disputed issues in political
science and democratic theory: the power of non-elected technical experts in
democratic societies.
    Diverse authors highlight occasions when technical bureaucracies in modern
societies achieve the power to implement their own preferences even against
the will of their democratically elected political superiors (Suleiman 1974;
Carpenter 2001; C. Johnson 1995). The authority of experts in contemporary
societies has captured the attention of a variety of social and political theorists
(Bell 1973; Freidson 1984; Sarfatti Larson 1984; Halliday 1987). Ideal-type
definitions of technocracy and democracy as political regimes are in direct
opposition. A technocracy is defined as “the administrative and political dom-
ination of a society by a state elite and allied institutions that seek to impose
a single, exclusive policy paradigm based on the application of instrumentally
rational techniques” (Centeno 1993, 314). A democracy, on the contrary, has
as one of its main characteristics the giving of equal weight to citizens’ prefer-
ences, even if these preferences oppose “efficient” policies. A technocracy, then,
is an exaggerated version of the dreaded “bureaucratic state” that has haunted
political theorists since the nineteenth century (Tocqueville 2000; Weber 1946;
Bell 1973).
    This book does not claim that “rule by experts” in the literal sense exists
in Colombia and Peru, or elsewhere in Latin America. As we will see, experts
coexist with other powerful actors, and they do not always win their battles.
Under some conditions, even powerful technocrats, well entrenched in the state,
can lose their positions. My main point is that experts are strong actors, with
significant autonomy and influence in the region. And in some policy areas,
such as economic policy making in Colombia and Peru, experts can achieve
strong continuity, pull elected politicians toward their preferences, and even
run government to a considerable degree, making the aforementioned demo-
cratic tension undeniable.
    There is an extensive body of literature highlighting the undemocratic ten-
dencies of technocrats in Latin America, particularly their secretive and unac-
countable policy style, as well as the controversial content of their sponsored
policies. While this book adds evidence to some of these charges, it also con-
tends that technocratic actors may have some positive effects on developing
democracies, such as restraining political appetites, enhancing state capacity,
initiating broad reforms in crucial areas of little interest for politicians, and
even making public policy more responsive to citizens’ needs (Williams 2006).
By reducing politicians’ patronage-oriented control over state resources and
Introduction                                                                   17

public policy, technocrats are also exercising a salutary effect on democracy. In
the absence of professional public service, experts’ power to restrain politicians
may resemble the positive influence exercised by bureaucracies over politicians
in developed democracies. Paradoxically, then, non-elected experts have also
contributed to the survival of democracy for three decades by making these
regimes more stable and attuned to citizens’ needs.


Organization of theÂ€Book
To develop my argument, I start with a discussion in ChapterÂ€2 of the limits
of the three instrumentalist perspectives on the experts’ role in Latin American
democracies. ChapterÂ€ 3 proposes a theory of technocratic autonomy that
explains the source of the experts’ autonomy and why it varies in strength
across policy sectors.
    ChapterÂ€ 4 analyzes the emergence and entrenchment of economic tech-
nocrats in Colombia from 1958 to 2013. Since the late 1950s in Colombia,
self-reproducing groups of experts in the Ministry of Finance (MF) and the
National Planning Department (NPD) have been in charge of key aspects of
economic policy. These technocratic elite have helped Colombia, which had
been trapped in a spiral of drug trafficking and political violence, to maintain
a record of stable, prudent, and creative economic policy (Urrutia 1991; Thorp
and Durand 1997; Botero 2005; Hershberg 2006).
    ChapterÂ€5 discusses the tenure of economic technocrats in Peru since 1980.
The early 1980s shows that technocrats’ failure to achieve continuity in the
Ministry of Economics and Finance (1980–1983) was due to the opposition
of political and business sectors. Peru witnessed the emergence of economic
experts in the Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas (MEF) during President
Alberto Fujimori’s government (1990–2000); these técnicos oversaw the
implementation of drastic market reforms in response to the country’s severe
economic crisis (Wise 2003, ch.6; Cortázar 2006). Technocrats maintained
autonomy after the crisis receded and through the successive governments of
Valentín Paniagua (2000–2001), Alejandro Toledo (2001–2006), Alan García
(2006–2011) and Ollanta Humala (2011–). In 1990, technical expertise was
enhanced within the MEF and has entrenched itself sinceÂ€then.
    ChapterÂ€ 6 focuses on two periods of health expertise in Colombia: the
health reforms under the National Front, especially under President Carlos
Lleras from 1966 to 1970, and the ambitious process of health reform during
the 1990s. In the first Colombian case, experts played a leading role in the
government and built a strong Ministry of Health during the National Front
years (1958–1974), especially under the presidency of Carlos Lleras Restrepo
(1966–1970). Nevertheless, these experts failed to maintain control of the min-
istry once the National Front ended and political parties captured the health
system to strengthen their patronage-based networks across the country. In
contrast, the second Colombian health policy episode (1993–2013) represents
18                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

a “least likely” case where technical autonomy is meaningful and continuity
significant. It is too soon to declare technical entrenchment, but there is signif-
icant stability, and technical ministerial picks are now common.
   ChapterÂ€7 analyzes the work of experts in Peru’s Ministry of Health from
1990 to 2002. The International Cooperation Office in the Peruvian Ministry
of Health concentrated high levels of expertise from 1993 to 2002. During
these years, experts oversaw broad policy reforms both to rebuild and restruc-
ture the health system after Peru’s internal war against the Shining Path (1980–
1994). This higher level of autonomy is explained by medium scores in two
of my factors. The growing interest of IFIs in health reform created a more
balanced constellation of stakeholders. Moreover, health policy became more
complex through the emergence of health economics, a policy approach that
became prevalent in the 1990s. Starting in 1999, however, experts’ influence
gradually weakened because of resource shortages and clashes with political
interests, as well as a decline in IFIs’ interest in health reform. These changes
led to the demise of experts inÂ€2002.
   ChapterÂ€8 concludes by exploring the generalizability of my theory of techni-
cal autonomy. It discusses cases of technocratic downfall in Argentina, Bolivia,
and Venezuela and also presents the broader implications of my findings.
2

Technocrats in Latin American Democracies:
Agents or Actors?




In a process starting in the late 1980s, and deepening with the neoliberal reforms
of the 1990s, technocrats have become important actors in Latin American
democracies. Experts’ heightened role under democratic regimes has stimu-
lated a lively theoretical debate about their influence in policy making and their
effective independence from other sociopolitical forces. Three instrumentalist
theories, each derived from a broader theoretical perspective, provide compet-
ing explanations for the heightened role of technocrats in contemporary Latin
America and, more particularly, the question of how officials who lack tenure
or institutional protections can become influential political actors. These theo-
ries find the source of experts’ influence in other actors; experts are the agents
of these powerful principals.
   By contrast, my perspective highlights experts’ autonomy: technocrats are
independent actors who contest regional politics in their own right. I argue
that experts “formulate and pursue goals that are not simply reflective of the
demands or interests of social groups, classes, or society,” thus fulfilling the
most widespread definition of autonomy in comparative politics (Skocpol
1985, 9). Experts not only have distinguishable preferences from social groups
but as I show, also enjoy a considerable degree of autonomy from their polit-
ical superiors.
   In this chapter, I present the three instrumentalist perspectives and discuss
their shortcomings in capturing the role of técnicos in the region. Although
they provide important insights into understanding technocratic power and
may be empirically accurate in particular cases, my evidence shows they greatly
overestimate the leverage of particular powerful actors over experts and fail to
capture the autonomy experts have in the region. In the next chapter, I develop
a theory of technocratic autonomy to explain these findings, including the var-
iation in the strength of technical autonomy both across policy sectors and
across time in the same policy sector.


                                                                               19
20                                       Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

     Before proceeding, it is worth noting that both the three instrumentalist
t­ heories and my technocratic autonomy model all reject a functional perspective
 that explains the greater importance of technocrats as a natural response to the
 complexities of state management caused by modernization and globalization
 (Williams 2006, 119). From a functional perspective, experts became relevant
 actors simply due to Latin American states’ need to respond to the challenges of
 a competitive global environment and increasingly technical domestic policy;
 states employ experts to fulfill the need for greater technical knowledge and
 will only fail to do so if such expertise is unavailable. A functional perspective
 certainly helps explain the need for expertise in the region, because countries
 that must deal with global integration, international demands, and complex
 policy issues have a big incentive to increase their expertise. And, clearly, expert
 management will not be feasible if states lack educated professional cadres
 from which they can recruit this expertise. However, if this functional perspec-
 tive were correct, we would expect to see experts having approximately equal
 levels of importance and influence in countries possessing similar technological
 and human resources and facing comparable external pressures. What we find
 in Latin America are different levels of technical expertise, both across coun-
 tries and within countries over time. The increasingly complex policy environ-
 ment may create demand for more technical expertise in certain policy areas,
 but how different countries respond to this need is a political question that
 remains unexplored (Schneider 1998, 79). The four competing theories, there-
 fore, all reject this functional perspective.


Political Agents
Electoral-incentives theories claim that experts derive their power from politi-
cians. Such a political-agents perspective assumes that politicians usually want
to maintain control over state resources, which are valuable for advancing their
electoral interests. However, this perspective predicts that under certain condi-
tions, politicians restrain their control over patronage and delegate the power
over policy making to experts (Geddes 1990, 218). The insulation politicians
provide gives technocrats considerable protection from other socioeconomic
actors and allows them to adopt technical policies. How can a theory based
on instrumental political interests explain the “enlightened” choice to delegate
power to technical experts?
   This literature provides two answers to explain this delegation. On the one
hand, politicians are aware that seeking shortsighted and narrow interests can
produce inefficient outcomes that ultimately harm their longer-term electoral
interests.1 Thus, on some occasions, politicians “tie themselves to the mast”


1
    For a description of this approach to explain market reforms in the developing world, see Bates
    and Krueger 1993, 464–465.
Technocrats in Latin American Democracies                                        21

to guard against their own irresponsible short-term behavior with the goal
of maximizing their medium-term political payoffs. Delegating authority to
­técnicos is one way to do so, but at the cost of restricting their use of patronage
 resources. From this perspective, some types of crises that threaten their elec-
 toral chances (e.g., hyperinflation) should lead politicians to bolster technical
 management. A second explanation sees this delegation as a way of directly
 advancing incumbents’ interests. Presidents or ruling parties may sometimes
 advance their political goals through broad reforms that require specialized
 knowledge; therefore, they appoint experts to carry out these reforms (Geddes
 1995, 213; see also: Geddes 1990, 213).
    Nevertheless, the key assumption of this perspective is that no matter how
 much power is delegated to experts, politicians remain the principals in this
 relationship. The power of appointment and dismissal gives politicians exten-
 sive influence, and ultimately control, over experts. This political control pre-
 cludes experts from gaining autonomy: technocrats may temporarily enjoy
 considerable latitude of action, but their fate always remains dependent on
 political discretion.
    Barbara Geddes, for example, argues that when the benefits of patronage
 are outweighed by the benefits politicians can gain from policy reforms, they
 create technocratic “pockets of efficiency” to enact these reforms (Geddes
 1990; 1994). Instances of state autonomy are described by Geddes as politi-
 cians’ insulation of state agencies (and the experts working in them) in order
 to advance their own political interests (Geddes 1994). Given the high political
 benefits of patronage in Latin America, Geddes expects instances of politicians
 insulating experts to remain rare, and when they do happen, to be short lived.
 Once the crisis has abated and the electoral calculus no longer favors policies
 promoted by experts, or when new incumbents with different preferences reach
 power, technocrats will be removed and technical areas will again succumb to
 patronage-oriented politics (Geddes 1990, 231–232).
    Not all proponents of political-agents theories use such a restricted under-
 standing of political interest as does Geddes. By attributing such a crucial role
 to patronage, Geddes underestimates the likelihood of technocratic appoint-
 ment even within a political-agents perspective. Other theories suggest that if
 certain conditions (e.g., a severe economic crisis) make the provision of some
 collective good more important for electoral success than does patronage, the
 probability of technical recruitment increases. This is Beatriz Magaloni’s argu-
 ment for explaining the appointment of neoliberal technocrats in Mexico dur-
 ing the 1980s (Magaloni 2006, ch. 3). Magaloni argues that politicians’ public
 commitment to drastically reduce patronage can be a crucial electoral asset
 during a severe economic crisis. Amid the debt crisis of the 1980s, Mexican
 voters could no longer be swayed with patronage expenditures because they
 had learned that irresponsible economic policy was bad for their long-term
 interests. At the same time, Mexican politicians learned that pursuing such irre-
 sponsible policies eventually had high electoral costs. Therefore, Institutional
22                                Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

Revolutionary Party (PRI) politicians appointed neoliberal technocrats as a
signal to voters of their commitment to responsible economic policy. Just as
technocrats in the 1950s and 1960s increased spending for their PRI bosses,
neoliberal technocrats served their political masters by reducing inflation and
public debt. Magaloni predicts that the end of the crisis should lead to the
demise of these allegedly powerful neoliberal técnicos.
    Although coming from a different theoretical perspective, Ben Ross
Schneider explains technocrats’ emergence in Latin America after the debt
crisis in terms of politicians’ urgent need to attract external investment to
their countries. Afraid that economic turmoil would negatively affect their
electoral interests, politicians appointed orthodox economic experts to “sig-
nal” their commitment to protecting foreign investments (Schneider 1998).
As in previous theories, Schneider argues that experts remain dependent on
politicians’ preferences as they lack “independent, enduring sources of power”
(Schneider 1998, 90). If economic conditions change, and/or external funds
become less important for politicians, technocrats will lose their control over
policy. As Schneider writes, “The term technocracy is a misnomer” (Schneider
1998, 90).
    Under these political-agents perspectives, assessing whether autonomy is
real or merely delegated is difficult. However, these theories have two crucial
and testable implications: experts are expected not to (1) trump key political
preferences, especially electoral interests, or (2) remain highly influential over
long periods of time. No matter how much power politicians delegate, these
theories presuppose that politicians will overrule technically based decisions
if they clash with their electoral interests. Similarly, these theories suggest sig-
nificant technical influence to be short-lived. When the policies preferred by
técnicos are no longer popular or necessary, especially once crises end or new
incumbents with different preferences enter office, this perspective predicts that
technocrats will adopt the policy preferences of their political patrons or face
dismissal.
    My research shows that a “political agents” perspective fails to capture the
role that experts play throughout the region, seriously underestimating the
power of technocrats vis-à-vis political actors. Technocrats’ expertise grants
them a level of autonomy that cannot merely result from political delegation.
The cases show experts acting as agenda setters, advancing reforms that fre-
quently affect key interests of their formal political superiors. In addition,
against the most basic assumption of electoral incentive theories, I document
how politicians have sometimes lost effective control over policy making, giv-
ing técnicos considerable latitude to craft and implement policies that tran-
scend political preferences.
    As discussed in Chapters 4 and 5, economic experts in Colombia and Peru
effectively restrained key political interests. Economic experts’ influence in
these countries allows them not only to resist political pressures but also to
Technocrats in Latin American Democracies                                        23

advance their own policy preferences. After they emerged in Colombia amid
the political violence and fiscal crises of the 1950s and 1960s, and Peru during
the economic catastrophe of the late 1980s, experts entrenched themselves in
economic institutions. Highly educated appointees in Colombia’s Ministry of
Finance (MF) and National Planning Department (NPD) and in Peru’s Ministry
of Economics and Finance (MEF) have acted as effective checks on politicians
by controlling the budget and restraining the public deficit. These cases show
experts taking an active role in parliamentary politics, frequently opposing
laws debated by Congress because they run counter to experts’ policy prefer-
ences. Experts also challenge proposals from members of the executive branch
(e.g., the president or ministers), showing that they are not merely agents of
their appointing superiors. In both countries, I document how experts imple-
mented reforms that affected electoral interests or restrained political preroga-
tives, such as the adoption of procedures designed to control expenditures and
resource distribution. Contrary to a political-agents perspective, then, eco-
nomic experts have had considerable leverage over politicians.
   In both cases, this ability to resist political pressures and advance policy
preferences remains high over time. There is some variation, especially when
facing personalistic and politically experienced presidents, but technocratic
independence from politicians has remained fairly stable in economic policy
areas. Experts’ control over public spending, for example, persisted during
good economic times, when politicians eagerly demanded more resources for
their constituencies. The fact that conflict over a key political interest – namely,
patronage resources – occurred under strong economic conditions contradicts
a political-agents perspective that ties experts’ power to crisis conditions. As
highlighted by previous works, economic experts’ power enhances during cri-
ses (Weyland 2002a; Teichman 1997), but the saliency of technocrats remains
high even after crises have passed. Technocratic influence over economic policy,
then, cannot be described as an episodic phenomenon.
   This autonomy is not only found in economic ministries, which are “more
likely cases” for technical autonomy. Chapters 6 and 7 document how health
experts achieved considerable control over policy and advanced reforms that
clashed with political interests. In both countries, we find episodes in which
experts designed and enacted policies that reduced political intrusion in the
health system. Even if this autonomy remained more vulnerable, it certainly
exceeded the expectations of a political-agents perspective. Further, the experi-
ence of the recent Colombian health reform (1991–2011) shows that technical
autonomy can achieve significant continuity in the health sector.
   My findings also point to a second crucial limitation of a political-agents
perspective and, more broadly, of theoretical perspectives that place politi-
cians as the cornerstone of Latin American politics. I document how several
reforms that were implemented in Latin American states were not closely mon-
itored by politicians. Rather than seeking to enhance their electoral interests
24                                Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

through public policy, as expected by a political-agents theory, politicians often
remained ignorant of technical procedures and the complex reforms taking
place. Although these reforms frequently affected their interests, politicians
were unaware of their full implications. These cases demonstrate that experts
frequently escape the control of their alleged principals.
    Due to the complex nature of economic policy decisions, this lack of aware-
ness is very clear in the economic episodes I explore, but it is also quite evident
in the health policy cases. As in prior works, my study also shows that health
experts helped advance reforms in Latin America even in the absence of politi-
cal involvement (Nelson 2004, 31–32; Ewig 2010). Peru’s health reforms in the
1990s, for example, were enacted with very little political involvement; experts
led reforms in which politicians, including even the minister of health, played
limited roles (Arroyo 1999, 549–551; Ewig 2010, 98; Ugarte and Monje, 1999,
576). Most of these changes were approved through ministerial or presidential
decrees, and the policies were rarely discussed outside of the technical teams
and consultants hired to design them (Ewig 1999, 490–493; Interview with
Meloni 2007).
    Even if it fails to capture experts’ role in Latin America, the political-agents
perspective does help explain the initial appointment of technocrats. As dis-
cussed later, this perspective’s proposed mechanisms for technical appointment
are useful for my own theory. In several of the episodes I explore, experts
secured appointments at the state level due to political decisions prompted by
the need for specialized technical knowledge to solve sensitive issues. Politicians
frequently turned to technocrats in the midst of a crisis or under pressure from
external actors (e.g., when politicians had to adopt stabilization plans, achieve
development goals promoted by external agencies, or comply with the require-
ments of conditional loans). Viable alternatives were not available, as parties
and bureaucracies lacked the necessary expertise, and the costs of doing noth-
ing were too high. In addition, my own theory adopts the cost-benefit evalu-
ation highlighted by this approach to explain why technocratic autonomy is
higher and continuity more likely in areas of government where poor policy
performance can inflict high political costs on politicians.
    In conclusion, a theoretical perspective based on short- and medium-term
electoral interests cannot explain the political autonomy of economic and
health experts. Experts do not unilaterally depend on politicians, but instead
command considerable autonomy and influence – in some cases even after
a technocrat’s political usefulness has declined. Furthermore, political-agents
perspectives overestimate politicians’ control over the design and adoption of
public policy, as well as their ability and willingness to monitor experts. Thus,
while a political-agents perspective helps to account for the initial decision to
empower technocrats, and technical autonomy is more likely in politically sen-
sitive areas, it fails to recognize the high degree of technical autonomy experts
achieve and the persistence of this autonomy over time. Technocrats are not
simply instruments of political actors.
Technocrats in Latin American Democracies                                                       25


Agents of International Financial Institutions
If technocrats’ power is not derived from politicians, does it come from the
backing of powerful foreign economic institutions? An “external agents” per-
spective argues that technocrats gain independence from politicians by becom-
ing informal agents of international financial institutions (IFIs). Although no
author goes as far as to assert that particular experts are directly chosen by IFIs,
the implication is that only experts who follow IFI policy agendas are accept-
able to these institutions. IFIs may not have direct control, but their immense
power over the state trumps other available technical choices. From this per-
spective, IFIs, such as the World Bank (WB) or the International Monetary Fund
(IMF), exercise pressure over politicians to insulate technocrats they approve
from political and economic interference (Stallings 1992; Kahler 1992; Van
Dijck 1998). Technocrats are the domestic representatives of these external heg-
emonic forces; they are powerful as long as they follow IFIs’ preferred policies.
   This external-agents perspective has its roots in the dependency theory
developed in the 1960s. This theory questioned the basic assumption that
developing states are sovereign, arguing that they were in reality subordinated
to the interests of developed capitalist countries. There was less agreement
among these authors about the mechanisms of this external control and how
much independence domestic actors could achieve from these forces (Frank
1966; Cardoso and Faletto 1979).2 Softer versions of dependency theory
give more importance to the state and domestic business coalitions, which
are sometimes in conflict with external interests (Evans 1979; Mahoney and
Rodríguez-Franco, forthcoming, 5–7). But in general, these theories expected
external forces to have a strong, fundamental influence over middle–income
Latin American states.3
   An “external agents” perspective attributes to IFIs the power to shape
domestic politics through various avenues (Kahler 1992; Stallings 1992). One
way is to employ “linkages,” defined as indirect modes of intervention and
support. Linkages between IFIs and states, for example, include promoting
policies and training local officials. IFIs can exercise their influence by recom-
mending that states adopt policies that have either been viewed as successful in
other countries or regions (e.g., cash transfers as a means to alleviate extreme
poverty) or that are regarded as necessary to face current and future threats
(e.g., programs for epidemic control). These linkages have a long history in
Latin America. Economic missions of foreign experts promoting broad institu-
tional reforms have been common in the region (Drake 1989; Sandilands 1990;

2
    For reviews of dependency theory, see Leys 1996, 11–19; Mahoney and Rodríguez-Franco,
    forthcoming.
3
    Although international businesses operating locally also constitute external economic forces, I
    include these business interests in the next section. External and internal business actors com-
    prise what I call business interests.
26                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

Cepeda Ulloa and Mitchell 1980, 238–241). Local experts receive frequent
invitations to attend courses and conferences organized by IFIs, especially the
World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank. In these workshops
and conferences, IFI policy recommendations and handbooks are publicized to
local experts (Weyland 2006). These linkages include the frequent recruitment
of domestic experts to serve as IFI cadres.
   In a globalized economy, however, a stronger mechanism to influence domes-
tic policies arises from a state’s need to obtain approval from IFIs in order
to access new sources of international credit and loans, which are especially
important during economic meltdowns. The need for fresh credit to fulfill
international and internal obligations leads states to sign conditionality agree-
ments that include broad policy reforms. Stallings defines this kind of direct
intervention by IFIs as “leverage” to distinguish it from linkages (Stallings,
1992, 52–58). States are “forced” to reform in accordance with IFI priorities in
order to assure their economic survival.
   According to this external-agents structural approach, local technocrats
guarantee states’ compliance with IFIs’ policy recipes. IFIs exercise their lever-
age and condition external loans on the appointment of experts sharing their
policy preferences. IFIs will even come to the defense of these technocrats if
political or business actors threaten their operation. In this way, IFIs guarantee
that those in charge of implementing their development recipes remain aligned
with their interests.
   Are técnicos informal agents of IFIs? Two facts suggest the answer is no
and that these theories overestimate the influence of IFIs. First, the relationship
of subordination postulated by this theory does not exist. IFIs may pressure
politicians in developing states to appoint experts, but subsequently have little
influence over the experts themselves. Second, the theory cannot explain the
maintenance of technical autonomy over time.
   My research shows that experts are better described as equals to IFIs. Local
experts are neither subordinates to IFIs nor always in agreement with them.
Quite frequently, técnicos reject IMF or World Bank suggestions in favor of
their own preferred policy options. Even under conditions of economic dis-
tress, when IFI influence is at its peak, local experts sometimes choose to disre-
gard the advice of these institutions.
   Economic technocrats and IFIs in Colombia have long had a difficult relation-
ship. In fact, Colombian technocrats first emerged not because of IFI ­lobbying
but rather due to national politicians who promoted experts within the state
in order to counterbalance the expertise of IFIs during intense ­international
negotiations. As one of the first members of the Colombian technocracy noted,
“To change this balance of forces, it was necessary to increase our national
capacity of analysis, give more knowledge to the technical cadres of the state,
and strengthen the fundamental aspects of the country’s macroeconomic man-
agement” (Botero 2005, 21).
   In Peru, we find similar evidence that experts do not act as agents of IFIs.
Members of Fujimori’s economic team claim that they autonomously believed
Technocrats in Latin American Democracies                                       27

that market reforms were the best solution to the economic crisis, thus deny-
ing that these reforms were imposed on them by IFIs. Supporting this claim
is evidence that experts pushed for more drastic reforms than those proposed
by IFIs (Weyland 2002a). Economic crises may increase IFI leverage, but the
recruitment experts and the programs these experts implement are not the
product of IFI control.
   The health policy episodes also demonstrate that local experts frequently
choose their own policies in direct opposition to IFI prescriptions. IFIs’ interest
in social sector reform during the 1990s put pressure on politicians to appoint
experts in these issue areas and provide them with necessary resources, but it
did not translate into control over health experts (Ewig 2004; 2010; Weyland
2006). As discussed thoroughly in Chapters 6 and 7, IFIs’ interest in social
policy helped trigger health reform, but local cadres had extensive authority to
design and conduct these reforms.
   The Colombian health reform, for example, was a unique model that gen-
erally followed the health economics approach promoted by IFIs such as the
World Bank during those years (World Bank 1993) but diverged significantly
from the privatization models international organizations favored. Similarly,
Peruvian health experts successfully resisted pressures from economic experts
in the MEF who demanded the adoption of health reforms in line with the
Chilean health reform model and World Bank recommendations. Colombian
and Peruvian experts’ policy preferences also included reforms recom-
mended by the World Health Organization (WHO), the Pan American Health
Organization (PAHO), and the United Nations Population Fund (UNFP), insti-
tutions that lack the kind of leverage over countries often attributed to IFIs.
   Moreover, even the adoption of IFI-sponsored policies does not necessar-
ily indicate subordination to external forces, possibly reflecting a more com-
plex relationship that provides additional evidence against a political-agents’
perspective. As two Peruvian experts reported, domestic economic technocrats
asked IFI representatives to include pension reforms that Fujimori had opposed
in the IFIs’ conditionality agreements in order to force the president’s hand
(interviews with Du Bois 2007 and Ugarte 2006). This example shows how
local experts can use IFIs to “enhance their bargaining leverage with domestic
opponents or hesitant political leaders” (Weyland 2005, 272). Similarly, IFIs’
demand that technocratic appointees meet some specialized education require-
ments is less a mechanism of IFI control than a convenient rule that allows
local experts to protect their autonomy from politicians.
   A second limitation of an external-agents theory is its inability to explain
experts’ persistent autonomy over time. My research shows how economic
experts keep their power even during good economic times, when developing
countries are less beholden to IFIs and can disregard many of these institu-
tions’ policy prescriptions. Nonetheless, in both countries, technical influence
has remained fairly constant across time. Similarly, health experts in Colombia
remained relevant after IFIs reduced their interest in social policy reform, such
as health policy.
28                                       Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

   An external-agents perspective, then, does not capture the role of experts
in Latin America. Nevertheless, as discussed in the following chapter, some
of this theory’s insights are useful to explain technical autonomy. IFIs can be
an important force behind the initial appointment of experts. Additionally, in
some policymaking issues, the involvement of these institutions helps to explain
the variation of technical autonomy across policy areas. My research shows
how IFIs can pressure politicians to appoint experts, with the initial techni-
cal appointments in economic agencies in Colombia and Peru coinciding with
economic crises during which IFIs strongly lobbied both countries. Similarly,
the appointment of experts in both countries’ health sectors during the 1990s
followed new recommendations from IFIs for health sector reforms that con-
siderably increased the technical sophistication of health policy (Nelson 1999;
Kaufman and Nelson 2004). And in often underfinanced social sectors, IFIs
and other internationalGuibert
                          cooperation agencies provide valuable resources that
enhance experts’ capacity to develop and implement policies. Finally, as dis-
cussed in the next chapter, the interest of these powerful actors contributes to
maintaining technical autonomy over time.
   In conclusion, a theory that depicts experts as the informal agents of IFIs
cannot account for the autonomy of technical cadres in Colombia and Peru.
First, the relationship of subordination stressed by this perspective does not
exist. More broadly, the theory exaggerates the leverage of IFIs over middle-
income countries, such as Colombia, Peru, and most Latin American states.
Although IFI leverage can encourage politicians to appoint experts in the state,
respect their autonomy, and contribute to their continuity, experts are clearly
not IFI agents.


Agents of Business
If experts’ power does not come from IFIs, does it emerge from business
interests? Domestic structural perspectives depict economic technocrats as
the agents of national business interests or foreign business interests operat-
ing locally. These approaches propose that as long as experts act according to
business interests, they receive informal yet strong protection from political
interference. Thus, the source of allegedly “technical” and “objective” policies
is dominant business associations and business leaders. Technocrats are the
chosen tools of economic elites to protect their interests by controlling public
policy (Estrada Álvarez 2005; Durand 2006; Schamis 1999). As stated by Bates
and Krueger when describing this perspective, “the empowerment of the eco-
nomic bureaucracy represents, then, an attempt to stabilize the fortunes and
protect the political triumph of particular interests” (1993, 465).4


4
    For a similar perspective in which business groups effectively determine state policies in Latin
    America, see Frieden 1985.
Technocrats in Latin American Democracies                                                    29

   Control over state actors becomes especially crucial for business interests
under democracy because elites lose many channels to protect their interests
that had existed during previous authoritarian regimes. In democratic environ-
ments, business actors are especially interested in keeping politicians or state
actors from advancing redistributive reforms (Schamis 1999; P. Silva 1991). A
common criticism of neoliberal technocrats in Latin America is precisely that
experts are closely tied to business elites who benefit from market reforms and
are allegedly the new dominant economic interests in the region (Ahumada
1996; Estrada Álvarez 2004; Durand 2006; Schamis 1999; Teichman 2002).
   This perspective has two versions: a strong structural version and a weak
structural one. Strong structural perspectives see economic forces, especially
business interests, as the primary drivers of politics in general, leaving little if
any space for technical autonomy or state autonomy more generally. Examples
of a strong structural perspective are presented by Schamis (1999) and Estrada
Álvarez (2004; 2005). For Schamis, the influence of “insulated” state experts
in Pinochet’s Chile did not come from experts themselves but from powerful
business coalitions (Schamis 1999, 237–238).5 Similarly, what others see as a
professional technocracy with autonomous preferences in the Colombian state,
Estrada claims is a front for the interests of economic elites. Evidence of this
dependence is emergence of new dominant business coalitions prior to the shift
in technocrats’ policy preferences.
   Interestingly, Estrada’s strong structural approach has space for some, albeit
limited and relative, autonomy for state actors. A la Marx in his Eighteenth
Brumaire, Estrada argues that during the 1970s, different sets of private inter-
ests in Colombia “balanced” each other out, giving the state leverage to act
“independently.” However, such an opening is expected to be short-lived, as
one business sector will eventually gain dominance over the economy. In the
Colombian case, Estrada claims, this period ended when financial and com-
mercial interests strengthened in the 1980s (Estrada Álvarez 2005, 275).
   Authors advancing a weak structural perspective do not share the assump-
tion that state preferences always mirror structural forces. Less deterministic
than strong structural perspectives, these views argue that state actors, such as
experts, can have considerable leverage over business interests. Nonetheless,
these authors argue that neoliberal technocrats are subordinated to the interests
of business groups that benefited from market reforms. Because these reforms
reduced the regulatory powers of Latin American states and favored certain
economic activities over others, they created “winners” who could impose their
policy preferences on the weakened state. Arce, for example, argues that Peru’s
market reforms were conducted by experts with significant autonomy from
societal interests but that the winners from these reforms then quickly gained

5
    Even if less deterministic than Schamis, Eduardo Silva also depicts distributional coalitions
    of business sectors as an important cause of technocrats’ power in Pinochet’s Chile (E. Silva
    1993).
30                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

leverage over economic policy agencies (Arce 2006). Similarly, Durand (2005)
proposes that the winners of market reforms in Peru dictate economic policy,
with financial, export, and mining interests in Peru controlling technocratic
decision making. And although she leaves more ambiguity about the degree
of dependence from business actors, Teichman also contends that economic
technocrats in Argentina and Mexico are strongly linked to and influenced by
the winners of market reforms (Teichman 2002).
   My research confirms that there is significant contact between técnicos and
business interests, especially since economic technocrats almost always have
private sector work experience before or after their appointment. Economic
policy making in Colombia, for example, has traditionally included consulta-
tions from business associations, especially the National Association of Coffee
Growers (ANC) and the industrialist association (ANDI) (Schneider 2004,
128–150; Juárez 1993a; 1993b). Similarly, CONFIEP, Peru’s all-encompassing
business association, maintains a close relationship with the MEF. Experts not
only often hail from the private sector but commonly leave their state posi-
tions to become corporate executives or chair business associations. In 2008,
for instance, three influential Colombian business associations were chaired by
ex-finance ministers or NPD directors. In Peru, this revolving door also exists:
of ten economic experts I interviewed in 2007 who had recently left high-
ranking state positions, eight were working for the private sector. Also, two
of Fujimori’s economic ministers were formerly presidents of business associa-
tions, while most of Alan García’s and Ollanta Humala’s economic ministers
came from private financial institutions.
   Although business actors are crucial to understanding technocrats’ power in
the region, and business does have significantly more access to experts than do
other social groups, this perspective, in both its strong and weak versions, fails
to capture the role of experts in Latin American democracies. Even if business
actors are powerful in the region, especially where traditional countervailing
forces like unions and leftist parties have lost power, this approach exaggerates
the control of business interests over experts and the state more generally. I dis-
card this theory for two reasons. First, even if a close relationship between eco-
nomic experts and the business sector exists, experts’ decisions do not betray
dependence on private interests. Second, the health policy cases show that
powerful experts can also emerge in policy sectors not dealing directly with
business interests, though these technocrats remain more vulnerable to polit-
ical inference than those in economic policy areas. These findings undermine
strong structural claims that attribute experts’ power to private interests.
   First, the alleged subordination of economic experts to business interests is
not confirmed by my research. All these perspectives assume experts’ proxim-
ity to the business sector is a sign that technocrats are dependent on dominant
economic actors in Latin America. But proximity between business and experts
is not sufficient evidence of technical subordination. Comparative studies of
bureaucratic independence in developed countries consider careers in business
Technocrats in Latin American Democracies                                      31

as evidence of dependence on private interests (Schneider 1993). In developed
countries, such an assumption seems adequate, as the state, think tanks, and
academia can provide similar working conditions as private enterprises. In
Latin America and other developing countries, however, this standard is inad-
equate because the private sector may be the only source of qualified indi-
viduals for state positions and the only form of employment for technocrats
after they leave the state. The technocratic phenomenon is explained partly by
the absence of a strong and professional bureaucracy from where to look for
experts to deal with complex policy issues: politicians and state actors find
such knowledge in the private sector. In assessing experts’ autonomy, the focus
should not be just on their career paths, but also on the role played by experts
while in office. Evidence from both countries demonstrates that past career
experience and future career expectations do not determine economic officials’
actions as assumed by this theoretical perspective.
    Economic technocrats’ decision making indeed shows that they enjoy sig-
nificant independence from business interests. Experts have broad powers
to conduct policy reforms in ways that affect seemingly dominant business
interests. In line with previous works on economic policy making and market
reforms, I do not find a strong relationship between business interest-group
lobbying and experts’ appointment or the initiation of economic reforms
(Bates and Krueger 1993, 455; Geddes 1995). Moreover, experts’ policies
sometimes cause abrupt shifts in business activities and privilege some eco-
nomic interests over others, resulting in enormous consequences for the struc-
ture of the economy, reducing the size of some sectors while allowing others
to emerge. Divergence between economic policy and private sector prefer-
ences usually results from experts’ need to respond to emerging international
challenges, leading to policies that clash with business and political interests
(Malloy 1992, 146–147). These conflicts show that while in office, experts are
aware that broader interests and international threats often require the sac-
rifice of particular business interests. Even if economic experts have, or plan
to have, stints in the private sector, they tend to advance more than private
interests alone while holding office.
    As discussed in more detail in Chapters 4 and 5, what experts perceived as
economic threats led them to make drastic policy decisions that affected pow-
erful business interests. In the 1960s, Colombian economic experts enacted
a series of policies to make the economy more competitive and less vulnera-
ble to external shocks but which put them at odds with powerful coffee and
industrial interests (Mares 1993; Thorp and Durand 1997). A second case con-
cerns the 1985 unexpected devaluation of the Colombian peso, which not only
harmed business interests directly (Thorp and Durand 1997, 223) but relied
on businesses being unaware of the changes about to occur. Similarly, market
reforms from 1990 to 1991 were led by technocrats and not by business prefer-
ences. Interestingly, in some of these episodes, technocrats adopted policies that
strongly deviated from the positions they lobbied for while chairing business
32                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

associations (Urrutia 1983, 42–43). These examples show that their roles as
government officials often trump their loyalty to business.
   Market reforms in Peru and export-oriented reforms in Colombia show
how experts’ decisions can drastically alter businesses’ power. Peru’s market
reforms, enacted in the early 1990s against the wishes of business interests,
such as the industrial lobby, were still strong. The business groups that benefited
from these reforms were not dominant when reforms were initiated nor suffi-
ciently organized to lobby for deep market reforms. As a result of the reforms,
industrialists lost considerable economic clout and political power, while other
sectors saw their importance increase. Similarly, technical reforms in Colombia
to move the country toward a more export-oriented development model in the
1970s and 1990s affected the power of the well-organized industrial sector.
   Experts, however, do not always win these clashes. Just a decade before
Fujimori’s market reforms in Peru, during Fernando Belaúnde’s government
(1980–1985), an informal alliance of business, labor, and politicians defeated
Peruvian economic experts trying to implement broad neoliberal reforms
(Conaghan and Malloy 1994; Malloy 1992). Similarly, during the 1970s in
Colombia, a coalition of business groups, especially industrialists, successfully
lobbied for the dismissal of Finance Minister Rodrigo Botero. Botero’s replace-
ment was less orthodox than his predecessor and reversed some of the ongoing
reforms. But these discrepancies show that experts’ policies cannot be equated
with business interests.
   In addition, experts in Colombia have consistently sought to insulate eco-
nomic policy making from business and political interests, a point that serves
as further evidence against a business-agent perspective. They have managed to
progressively reduce the influence of the private sector and politicians in policy
making. In the 1960s under Carlos Lleras, técnicos adopted reforms to reduce
congressional control over economic policy. They were worried that congres-
sional involvement would open the door for strong lobbies from regional
business interests. In the 1980s, Colombian economists sought to insulate the
Monetary Board from private interests, because it not only determined infla-
tion policy but also could provide special credit to business. Technocrats got
their way in the 1991 Constitution, which assigns these responsibilities to an
independent board of directors in the Central Bank. Rather than enhancing
businesses’ influence over public policy, Colombian técnicos pushed to reduce
the opportunities for lobbying.
   In Peru, there has been less conflict between MEF and the “winners” of the
market reforms – especially financial, mining, and some export interests – which
now have considerably more power than do industrialists. A good deal of con-
sensus exists regarding policy between these newly dominant business sectors
and experts in charge of economic policy (Arce 2006; Durand 2006). Certainly,
such consensus is expected because economic reforms benefited certain eco-
nomic activities in accordance with the reformers’ preferences, thereby showing
the triumph of experts over those business sectors that opposed their reforms.
Technocrats in Latin American Democracies                                        33

   While Peruvian experts are undoubtedly closer to the private sector than are
their Colombian counterparts, as discussed in Chapter 5, it is overreaching to call
such proximity subordination. Recently, Peruvian technocrats have had discrep-
ancies with business interests; for example, they imposed new taxes on financial
operations in order to extract more revenue from the banking sector, which had
benefited from market reforms. Similarly, the government imposed regulations
on retirement funds administered by private firms. And more recently, an origi-
nally leftist-oriented government elected in 2011 has maintained technical con-
tinuity in economic institutions and is using experts’ knowledge to extract more
resources from mining enterprises. So, despite being closer to business than are
their Colombian counterparts, Peruvian experts still remain quite autonomous
from social forces and will likely find themselves more at odds with the private
sector when the current period of economic growth passes.
   A second limitation of a business-agents perspective is that it cannot explain
experts’ considerable autonomy in social policy sectors such as health. My
research documents that experts in these areas with weak or no links to eco-
nomic elites effectively opposed political and IFI interests. The Peruvian case,
for example, shows that when business actors promoted particular health
reforms, such as privatizing workers’ health insurance, experts in the Ministry
of Health ignored them and adopted different policies. Similarly, the 1993
Colombian health reform included a series of benefits for informally employed
Colombian citizens that increased the social obligations of private enter-
prises and thus clearly negatively affected business interests. More recently in
Colombia, health technocrats are pushing for stronger regulations and control
over health purchasers.
   To conclude, although businesses muster considerable power in the region
and have close linkages to experts, a “business-agents” perspective fails to
explain the role played by experts in both countries. Significant discrepancies
exist between experts and business interests, showing that technical policy mak-
ers have meaningful autonomy from economic elites. Even if this perspective is
insufficient to explain technocratic power, however, my theory does recognize
the strength of business actors as an important factor behind variation in tech-
nical autonomy across policy areas. Expertise is indeed more likely to become
entrenched in sectors of great interest for business elites, such as economic areas,
while it remains more vulnerable in social sectors with no similar stakeholders,
such as health. Yet, while I argue in the next chapter that business stakeholders
enhance technical autonomy and contribute to its entrenchment, a business-
agent perspective does not fully explain technocratic power in the region.

Conclusion: The Power of Experts
In sum, the three instrumentalist theories do not capture the role played by
experts in Latin American democracies. Their main limitation is that they all
exaggerate the control of a particular actor over technocrats. Técnicos’ position
34                                Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

in the state allows them to frequently design and implement policies not always
understood or promoted by politicians, IFIs, or businesses. As such, experts are
better conceptualized as autonomous actors.
    By underestimating technocrats’ relevance, these instrumentalist perspec-
tives miss one of the most important sources of policy reform and institutional
change in contemporary Latin America. These instances cannot be dismissed
as anomalies or exceptions within regular patterns; in recent decades, techno-
crats have regularly been responsible for selecting and implementing significant
reform packages without significant input from other actors. More broadly, as
discussed in the conclusion, these findings point to the limitations of electoral-
incentives theories and structural approaches for the study of politics in Latin
America: these theories do not give enough attention to powerful state actors
such as technocrats. In the jargon of political science, technocrats deserve to be
considered independent variables when studying politics and policy making.
    The previous discussion also shows that technocratic power in some policy
areas is more stable than is usually assumed by these competing theories. Some
of these perspectives tie experts’ influence to an acute crisis that weakens politi-
cians and makes them delegate authority to experts. My findings confirm that
expert influence rises under crisis conditions but, as discussed throughout the
cases, is not dependent on these conditions; it remains stable even once the cri-
sis has passed. In what follows, I show that economic technocrats in Colombia
and Peru, and even health policy experts in the second Colombian episode,
have remained quite influential under “normal” political and economic condi-
tions. The Colombian technocracy, for example, advanced market reforms as
a preemptive strategy – not in response to a crisis. Similarly, Colombian and
Peruvian experts have maintained their preferred policy of fiscal prudence even
under booming economic conditions, a time during which any autonomy con-
ferred solely by a crisis situation would surely have dissipated.
    These findings open a new set of questions that instrumentalist theories
ignore or downplay. What is the source of technical autonomy? Why are pow-
erful technocrats more likely to be found in the economic policy arena rather
than in other policy areas where expertise is also required, such as health pol-
icy? And why does technical autonomy consolidate in some areas while remain-
ing more precarious in others, vulnerable to changes in the political landscape?
In the next chapter, I develop a theory of technocratic autonomy that seeks to
answer these questions.
             3

             A Theory of Technocratic Autonomy




             In the previous chapter, I showed that instrumentalist theories fail to account
             for the autonomy of technocrats in several Latin American states. Under cer-
             tain conditions, técnicos can act as agenda setters who draft policies according
             to their own preferences and, often, successfully implement them, even against
             the desires of politicians, IFIs, and business interests. Furthermore, in some pol-
             icy areas experts even achieve entrenchment – meaning incumbent politicians
             are informally forced to appoint officials in that policy area with similar levels
             of training and policy preferences.
                As such, technocrats exercise equivalent powers to other political actors
             considered autonomous in political science, such as formally independent state
             agencies and international organizations (Krasner 1984, 224; Skocpol 1985, 9;
             Brint 1990, 369; Carpenter 2001, 15; Barnett and Finnemore 1999). As men-
             tioned, these findings are surprising: technocrats usually lack either institutional
             protections, like bureaucratic tenure, and resources associated with ­political
             power in Latin America: votes, guns, or money. It seems that technocrats should
             be beholden to the politicians who appoint them or the societal and interna-
             tional actors who influence politicians’ choices. Yet we observe experts enjoy
             considerable autonomy from these actors. How can technocrats be both auton-
             omous and influential political actors in the region? In this chapter, I ­propose
             a theory of technocratic autonomy that explains (1) where experts’ autonomy
             comes from, (2) why it varies across policy areas, and (3) what causes it to
             become entrenched in some situations and remain vulnerable in others.
                The chapter is organized as follows. In the first section, I explain how exper-
estructura   tise provides technocrats with considerable leverage over other sociopolitical
del          actors. Then I account for the variation in technical autonomy across time and
capitulo 3
             policy area by showing how two factors related to the politics of policy making
             in areas where experts operate favor technical autonomy. These two factors are
             crucial for explaining higher levels of technical autonomy, as they are especially


                                                                                              35
     36                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

     important in limiting political intrusion, thus favoring technical continuity. Two
c)   additional factors related to the technical aspects of policy – the degree of tech-
d)   nical consensus and the complexity of technical knowledge – further increase
     technical autonomy. In the third and last section, I show how these factors
     contribute to technical entrenchment and briefly discuss the conditions that
     may lead powerful experts to lose their autonomy. Throughout the ­chapter,
     I include evidence from episodes of technocratic autonomy in Colombia and
     Peru to substantiate my claims, although these points are further developed in
     the following chapters.


     The Source of Experts’ Autonomy: Knowledge Is Power
     Expertise is the fundamental source of technocratic autonomy. A scarce
     resource in Latin America, expertise allows technocrats to advance their pol-
     icy preferences against the interests of other powerful actors. Diverse works in
     the social sciences highlight technical expertise as a source of political power.
     These works show how bureaucracies, state bodies, international organiza-
     tions, and technocrats use expertise to gain considerable influence over other
     actors. There are two main reasons in the literature that explain why technical
     expertise is an effective political resource: (1) the growing legitimacy of tech-
     nical knowledge in modern societies and (2) the leverage expertise provides to
     its user.
         Some authors argue that the need to respond to complex social, political,
     and international demands in increasingly intricate societies gives technical
     actors strong legitimacy that translates into power (Meynaud 1969; Bell 1973;
     Haas 1992, 7–9). One piece of evidence for this growing social legitimacy is the
     increased importance of technical education for obtaining positions of power
     (Putnam 1977, 384–385). Technical knowledge provides legitimacy through
     the claim that its application produces objectively effective and politically neu-
     tral solutions to social problems (Schaar 1984, 120; Weber 1946). Because
     technical knowledge purports to follow scientific rules of internal coherence
     and thereby be impartial, technical actors may be less vulnerable to accusations
     of partisanship, even if values or ideological preferences underlie their assess-
     ments. Weber, for example, points out that bureaucrats, even those with hidden
     normative agendas, gain their authority partly from claiming they are rational
     and impartial actors who are best suited to solve complex issues (Weber 1946).
     In short, technical knowledge by itself provides considerable power to its user.
         The increasing legitimacy of technical knowledge certainly contributes to
     experts’ power in Latin America but does not alone fully explain their height-
     ened influence. This legitimacy is relevant during moments of uncertainty, when
     politicians are forced to look for legitimized forms of expertise that can provide
     solutions to acute crises. However, my research suggests that technical legiti-
     macy is more of an outcome than an intrinsic asset valued socially. Technocrats
     are not powerful just because they have social legitimacy, but rather gain this
A Theory of Technocratic Autonomy                                                              37

legitimacy over time due to the results of their policies. While this accumulated
legitimacy further empowers technocrats as time passes by making it easier for
them to discredit non-technical alternatives to their proposals, it does not fully
explain experts’ initial source of power and the crucial years in which their
position is disputed.
    A more relevant source of the political power of technical expertise is the
leverage it provides over other actors. Because technical expertise is highly spe-
cialized and available only in those who invest significant resources in obtaining
it, there is a strong information asymmetry that empowers those who possess it
over those who do not. Thus technical knowledge not only grants experts legit-
imacy by enabling them to fulfill their duties with greater effectiveness than can
other bureaucrats, but creates an information asymmetry that they can use to
advance their own interests and influence. Knowledge provides strong power
to its bearer.
    One example of how technical knowledge provides influence comes from
Weber, who argues that bureaucrats can exercise political power by supply-
ing politicians with only selective information that leads politicians to adopt
the bureaucrats’ preferences (Weber 1946). Similarly, principal-agent theories
in American politics focus on this asymmetry of information and uncertainty
about policy choices to explain how bureaucrats can escape the political con-
trol of their formal principals (Miller and Moe 1983; Moe 1984; Waterman
and Meier 1998).1 Barnett and Finnemore highlight the way in which interna-
tional organizations exploit their expertise to influence states. By classifying
information according to their own preferences, adopting particular interpre-
tations of international rules, and promoting the diffusion of certain norms
and ideas, these organizations affect the interests of international actors and
enhance their own influence (Barnett and Finnemore 1999). Lastly, Meynaud
documents how high ranking bureaucrats in France influence their political
superiors through diverse strategies, such as delaying regulation, using informa-
tion for their own advantage, or implementing legislation selectively (Meynaud
1969, 74–87).
    This asymmetry of expertise between experts and politicians is consider-
able in Latin America. In much of the region, politicians lack the technical
capabilities and institutionalized bureaucratic support of their counterparts
in developed countries (Santiso and Whitehead 2006, 19–20). Whereas politi-
cians in the United States and Europe may have access to experts employed
in their party or elsewhere in the bureaucracy who can evaluate technocrats’
proposals and actions, the relative scarcity of such expertise in Latin America
makes politicians more dependent on experts. Therefore, these stark technical
asymmetries endow technocrats with considerable autonomy, even if they lack

1
    Most of this literature does not recognize bureaucratic autonomy as conceptualized in the other
    examples. These authors explain bureaucratic “independence” by rational, calculated, political
    delegation, thus limiting the claim that bureaucrats can have real autonomy.
38                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

the institutional protections enjoyed by high-level bureaucrats in developed
democracies.
   These information asymmetries explain why technocrats reach their posi-
tions in the state in the first place. Electoral-incentives perspectives correctly
identify the most frequent mechanisms behind experts’ appointment within the
state: politicians need technocrats to respond to challenges they cannot handle
by themselves or conduct complex reforms that will reap them political gains.
The challenges that prompt the experts’ appointment include economic crises,
external demands from IFIs for reforms that require technically qualified per-
sonnel, and urgent domestic political demands.
   The incumbent frequently appoints experts in order to signal to voters and
other political and economic actors that the government is handling the chal-
lenge responsibly. As Haas discusses, “Failed policies, crises, and unanticipated
events that call into question their [decision makers’] understanding of an issue
area are likely to precipitate searches for new information, as are the increas-
ing complexity and technical nature of problems” (Haas 1992, 29). Politicians
faced with political quandaries will turn to specialists “to ameliorate the uncer-
tainties and help them understand the current issues and anticipate future
trends” (Haas 1992, 13). Experts provide authoritative recommendations and
ideas about the best way to deal with these issues, using instances of técnicos
in other countries that successfully responded to similar events to support their
positions. They also have the skills to respond to external demands for high-
quality policy making and to become the interlocutors of IFIs.
   But politicians do not seek experts only in times of crisis. As political-incen-
tives theories also highlight, politicians can use experts as a tool for politi-
cal gains. When politicians can benefit from policy reforms, they often create
technical “pockets of efficiency” to implement these changes, insulating high-
quality bureaucracies from socioeconomic pressures and providing them with
resources normal bureaucracies usually lack (Geddes 1994; 1990). Reformist
politicians may also seek specialists to advance their sponsored reforms. As is
clear in the Colombian health policy episodes, health experts reached the state
level thanks to the genuine reformist goals of Presidents Carlos Lleras (1966–
1970) and Gaviria (1990–1994). Both presidents embraced reformist agendas
that transcended political gains. Whether because of need, ambition, or true
concern for their citizens’ well-being, incumbents find in experts the necessary
technical knowledge their political parties and state bureaucracies lack.
   Once in their positions, however, technocratic reform teams’ expertise allows
them to escape the limits politicians initially place on their power. Technocrats
have a set of goals that do not necessarily coincide with those of their political
superiors. The strong asymmetry of technical knowledge between experts and
politicians, in addition to the fact that many políticos lack a proper under-
standing of the broader and longer-term effects of many reform proposals,
allows experts to outmaneuver their formal principals. I identify two mech-
anisms through which experts gradually gain leverage over their political
A Theory of Technocratic Autonomy                                                 39

superiors and expand their control over policy areas: (1) the rise in technical
­asymmetry as a result of the increasingly complex policy that experts design
 and (2) experts’ intentional efforts to augment their autonomy.
     The first mechanism highlights how the act of appointing técnicos makes
 politicians more dependent on their skills. This mechanism is a direct conse-
 quence of delegating policy making to experts: técnicos’ capabilities imme-
 diately increase the technical understanding required to manage policy. As
 different experts interviewed for this book pointed out, just by using the
 technical expertise their political superiors and fellow bureaucrats lack, and
 consequently raising the complexity of policy making, políticos would have
 difficulty managing these policy areas were they to wrest control of them from
 the experts. (interviews with Caballero Argáez 2007, Iwasaki 2007, Meloni
 2007, and Pasco Font 2007). The result of politicians’ dependence on experts
 is greater technical autonomy.
     Gradually, the policy areas where experts are in charge become sufficiently
 complex that politicians lose familiarity with their internal operation and are
 no longer capable of running them swiftly. Drafting budget allocation plans,
 fulfilling transparency requirements, implementing internationally funded proj-
 ects, and following internationally established administrative procedures are
 duties frequently beyond politicians’ abilities, thus enhancing experts’ leverage
 over their superiors. Experts also give politicians access to wide networks of
 international technical institutions and agencies with which experts share a
 common language. Drafting proposals for external funding or responding to
 particular demands from these institutions are technical jobs that politicians
 frequently cannot handle by themselves.
     Two aspects amplify this dependence. First is the relatively short term of
 most ministers in Latin America. Ministers usually understand that their ten-
 ure in office will not last long. Therefore, they have no time to waste if they
 want to make any difference so they ask experts for advice about the best way
 to achieve their goals. Similarly, politicians take care to avoid causing unin-
 tended damage to ongoing projects and reforms, especially if the reforms are
 ­sponsored by international organizations. As discussed below, the higher the
  potential political costs of interfering with experts’ policies and the complexity
  of the reforms underway, the higher this political restraint. In short, minis-
  ters are transient actors with little incentive or ability to challenge technocrats
  working within their ministries.
     Second, in countries where political parties are weak, and thus professional
  politicians scarce, this asymmetry is even greater. Amateur politicians lack both
  basic information about how the state works and support from institutional-
  ized political parties that have state management experience. The result is that
  politicians are more uncertain about the effects of changing policy, which pro-
  vides more room for experts’ stability. So, by acting in line with expectations,
  experts entrench expertise within the state and make other actors, political or
  socioeconomic, accept the new technical standards in policy making.
40                                       Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

   A crucial point in my theory is that experts play an active role in securing
their autonomy. The second mechanism reveals how, using their superior tech-
nical knowledge, experts often strategically maneuver to protect and increase
their autonomy from their political superiors. Diverse authors have highlighted
this strategic use of expertise to advance technocrats’ preferences in Latin
America. Guillermo O’Donnell, for example, shows how highly trained indi-
viduals, tired of politicians’ profligate behavior, formed alliances in the sixties
and early seventies with the military in the Southern Cone to impose “rational
and efficient” development models (O’Donnell 1973, 79–89). These experts
brought to this alliance their internationally legitimized developmental recipes
and external networks. Focusing also on the Southern Cone, Biglaiser docu-
ments how economists used their technical knowledge to convince the ruling
military leaders of the soundness of their economic prescriptions and exclude
less technically capable actors from cabinet debates (Biglaiser 2002). Similarly,
Grindle documents how politically savvy Mexican experts under the Partido
Revolucionario Institucional (PRI) used their knowledge to carefully advance
their preferences, seek alliances with politicians and other bureaucrats, and
protect their office’s independence (Grindle 1977, 416–419).
   Building on this previous work, I identify and further develop four strate-
gies that experts employ to maintain and strengthen their influence over policy
making. These consist of (1) purposefully excluding actors who lack technical
training from policy making; (2) diverting political and socioeconomic pres-
sures from their policy areas; (3) building informal and formal institutions that
guarantee technical stability and reproduction; and (4) establishing alliances
with other actors to advance their own preferences.2
   First, technocrats use their knowledge to exclude actors without similar
technical expertise from participating in policy debates. As mentioned above,
sometimes this outcome is simply the natural consequence of appointing
experts, but in other cases, it can be the intentional result of experts using their
knowledge as a political weapon. Increasing the level of technical knowledge
required to understand public policy gives experts a crucial advantage over
other state actors, such as politicians and bureaucrats, and even private actors
that may try to influence policy making. Experts, for example, present their
arguments with studies that use empirical data to evaluate the consequences of
policy choices. If politicians and other actors such as business groups cannot
produce proposals of a similar technical sophistication, they are at a disadvan-
tage in deliberations.
   Second, expertise becomes a key resource for diverting political or socio-
economic pressures that threaten to override technocrats’ preferences. Instead

2
    I focus here on strategies to maintain and enhance technical autonomy, but other strategies are
    also used by technical reform teams to advance policy reforms in developing states (see, for
    example, Grindle 2000; 2004). For more about reformist strategies to minimize political costs in
    the developed world, see Pierson 1994.
          A Theory of Technocratic Autonomy                                                41

          of clashing directly with their political superiors or socioeconomic actors by
          rejecting policies these actors do not support, experts use more subtle, yet
          highly effective, diversion strategies (Centeno 1993, 322–323; Grindle 1977,
          421–422). My research identifies several of these strategies. Specifically, experts’
          control over information allows them to restrain or promote certain courses
          of political action. For example, experts may convince politicians or IFIs that
          particular electorally driven policies are infeasible or counterproductive and
          then commit their politically appointed superior, whose time horizon tends to
          be short, to long-term projects that have significance only técnicos themselves
          fully grasp. Similarly, experts can adapt laws to their own preferences by inter-
          preting their scope and intention in ways that either narrow or widen their
          intended effects. Experts can also choose to selectively enforce laws in ways
          that harmonize these laws with the técnicos’ original preferences. These strate-
          gies maintain and advance technical autonomy.
             Third, experts often try to establish formal and informal institutional require-
          ments to guarantee technocrats’ continued appointment and reproduction. By
          demanding technical qualifications in order to gain office, they turn expertise
          into a requirement for recruitment into the agencies under technocratic con-
          trol. By doing so, experts force politicians to hire others with similar levels of
          education and preference while preventing their political superiors from using
          positions as patronage spoils. Additionally, by providing adequate incentives,
          experts can guarantee their reproduction in the state. Colombian economic
          agencies, for example, offer scholarships to their members to pursue graduate
          studies abroad. Technocrats purposefully designed these incentives to reduce
          politicization. Colombian economic experts even created civil society institu-
          tions, such as the think tank Fedesarrollo, to enhance the level of expertise
          in society, provide support for expert-sponsored policies, and harbor experts
          when they leave the state (Botero 2005). Experts also provide formal institu-
          tional protections to agencies created to carry out their sponsored reforms. In
          the sixties, Colombian economic experts insulated export-promotion agencies
          (Juárez 1993a; Díaz-Alejandro, 1973). Similarly, experts in Peru during the
          1990s created new regulatory agencies with management laws akin to those of
          private institutions, in order to prevent their bureaucratization (Wise 2003).
             Finally, experts build strategic alliances with politicians, socioeconomic
          actors, and IFIs. As my research shows, technocrats may approach economic
          and political elites to ask for support for their policy preferences and reforms,
          sometimes enlisting these actors as allies against their political superiors that
          oppose these changes. Technocrats may even use the media, sometimes off the
          record and without their political superiors’ permission, to create negative
          public perceptions of policies they oppose. Experts’ knowledge is a critical
          contribution to these alliances, as other actors frequently lack the expertise to
          defend these proposals on technical grounds.
             Expertise, then, is the main source of technocrats’ autonomy. These findings
expert--> are noteworthy and diverge from both structural and political-agents’ theories
autono
42                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

that downplay the importance of expertise as an independent factor in policy
making and politics. Nonetheless, I also find that the degree of autonomy var-
ies across policy sectors and even within the same policy sector across time.
In some policy areas, expertise is more effective as a political resource, allow-
ing experts to have considerably more capacity to prevent external intrusion
in their policy areas and advance their sponsored policies. Yet in other areas,
technical knowledge seems to provide experts little protection from political
interference. Even if technocrats are actors in all these areas, they are consider-
ably more constrained in some than others.
   Furthermore, in policy areas with favorable conditions, experts are more
likely to achieve technocratic entrenchment, which occurs when the political
cost of appointing unqualified individuals to head these policy areas becomes
too high for the incumbent. Incumbents may appoint new officials, but they
must also be experts who have similar technical credentials as their prede-
cessors. At that point, only a major departure from “politics as usual” could
lead to experts’ removal from their positions. In other policy areas, however,
this autonomy remains weaker, experts more vulnerable, and entrenchment
unlikely. The passage of time alone does not necessarily make technical auton-
omy more secure in these areas. What factors explain this variation in technical
autonomy across policy areas and in the same policy area across time?


Determinants of Technical Autonomy
I propose that four factors – two related to the politics of policy and two
related to the technical aspects of policy – determine the degree of technical
autonomy experts will achieve in a given policy sector and the likelihood of
technical entrenchment. The first two factors explain why some areas have
higher technical autonomy and why technical entrenchment is more likely.
The latter two, if present, enhance technical autonomy and raise the likeli-
hood of technical continuity. The first two highlight the importance of politics
and socioeconomic actors for technical autonomy and technical stability; the
latter two support the argument that knowledge itself is a valuable political
resource.


The Politics of Policy
Experts’ knowledge and strategies account for a significant portion of their
power in Latin America. Nonetheless, the political context in which techno-
crats operate affects the degree of autonomy experts secure and, as discussed
in the next section, the likelihood of entrenching technical autonomy. Two
aspects of the surrounding political situation are particularly important: (1)
the cost to the incumbent of poor policy performance and (2) the constellation
of stakeholders with interests in a policy sector. When poor policy performance
has high political costs, such as when there are urgent problems to be solved,
A Theory of Technocratic Autonomy                                              43

and there are multiple powerful socioeconomic actors competing to influence
policy, all players in the political game may find that their optimal strategy is
to not interfere with technocrats implementing “efficient” policy, which in turn
gives experts space to establish their autonomy. In short, these politics of pol-
icy factors allow us to identify more likely and less likely cases for technical
autonomy.

Political Cost of Poor Policy Performance
The first factor is the cost to the incumbent of delivering poor policy out-
comes. As mentioned before, politicians usually appoint experts to respond
to acute crises they cannot solve by themselves. After this initial appointment,
incumbents evaluate the costs and benefits of leaving experts in control of
policy making. I propose that, when potentially high, these costs decrease
experts’ vulnerability and enhance their chances of securing long-term con-
trol over policy making. Incumbents may push experts to adopt policy prefer-
ences that politicians favor, but they have reasons not to significantly reduce
technical capacity or interfere in technical policy making. If politicians
appoint officials explicitly as technocrats, it is paramount that these offi-
cials are seen as technically credentialed and independent of political control.
Otherwise, politicians will face significant political costs. Thus incumbents
refrain from interfering in these areas, enhancing autonomy and favoring
technical continuity.
   I argue that the most important political costs of undermining or firing tech-
nocrats are the potential consequences of hurting the population. Inadequate
policy outputs in some issue areas can hurt the electoral chances of politicians,
especially if poor policy exacerbates a crisis. If negative consequences are dif-
ficult to foresee, politicians are even more risk averse. And if a previous crisis
has made the population more sensitive about policy making in particular issue
areas, the potential costs of interfering are considerably higher. In other policy
spheres, by contrast, inadequate policy outputs have less serious repercussions
for politicians, and changes in personnel do not carry similar risks.
   Regarding the political benefits of controlling a policy sector for the
incumbent, the most important is the potential patronage resources it offers.
Technocratic management reduces political discretion over the allocation of
public resources. Some issue areas offer vast amounts of resources to politi-
cal actors: control over budget distribution, large numbers of jobs to allocate
among party members, well-paid positions in state-owned enterprises for polit-
ical allies, procurement contracts for potential donors of campaign contribu-
tions, etc. Sectors with more resources to distribute, then, are tempting targets
for interference by politicians.
   When a new incumbent reaches power, the sitting incumbent that appointed
experts changes his preferences, or when technocrats’ preferences clash with
those of politicians, experts’ continuity is questioned. If there are no clearly
perceived costs of intruding in a policy area, the incumbents’ incentives to
44                                   Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

table 3.1. Political Costs of Poor Policy Performance

High Political Costs                               Low Political Costs
• Considerable share of the population             • Small share of the population
  affected.                                          affected.
• Mobilized/influential social classes affected.   • Mainly lower, less politically
• High potential damage.                             influential social classes affected.
• Visible damage that is easily traced to the      • Low/diffuse damage.
  incumbent.                                       • Difficult to link the incumbent
• Prediction: Incumbents refrain from                with negative policy outcomes.
  interfering in these areas, enhancing            • Prediction: Few political costs for
  autonomy and favoring technical                    incumbents if they interfere with
  continuity.                                        technical policies.



intervene and fire experts are higher. What factors are relevant for incumbents’
evaluation of their political costs?
    As shown in Table 3.1 four aspects seem especially relevant for this evalua-
tion. The first is the share of the population affected by poor policy decisions.
In general, politicians will find political decisions that affect a larger number of
the population more costly. Secondly, if the policies in question hurt the upper
and middle classes, which are typically more politically mobilized and influen-
tial than are poor sectors, potential political costs increase considerably. Third,
the severity of the potential damage matters for this assessment. Poor decisions
that could inflict serious damage are more costly than those with less severe
impact. Finally, politicians will consider how visible and traceable the poten-
tial consequences are. In some issue areas, poor decisions, or stalling in lieu of
making a decision, can have immediate and noticeable effects on the well-being
of the population. If failed policy decisions have an immediate impact, political
interference in technical policy making becomes more costly. However, if neg-
ative consequences are likely to appear only after a significant delay or if inac-
tion is not politically noticeable, the incumbent has more freedom to interfere
in policy making and override technocrats.
    Given the factors that affect the political consequences of poor policy are
relatively constant, the cost of intervention in an issue area remains fairly simi-
lar across time. However, certain conditions can vary over time, thereby chang-
ing the cost of firing experts. One such factor is the occurrence of crises, which
can affect the magnitude of political costs in several ways. Crises can make the
population more sensitive to inadequate policy making. The memory of crises
that brought on pain and resulted in enormous costs to the population makes
citizens more aware of the importance of some policy sectors, thus increas-
ing the political costs of intervention. If experts are considered responsible for
restoring social and economic stability, they would be associated with these
better policy outcomes and thus more costly for politicians to remove from the
A Theory of Technocratic Autonomy                                                45

state level. Similarly, if experts are blamed for the crisis, the political costs of
firing them are lower.
    Experts’ sponsored policies can also raise the political costs of interven-
tion in technical areas by producing positive feedback, defined as “the ways in
which previous policy choices influence present political processes” (Pierson
1994, 39). As highlighted by Pierson, policies are not only an outcome of
political struggle and negotiation. Policies can affect politics: “traditionally,
researchers treated policy as the result of political forces (the dependent var-
iable), but rarely as the cause of those forces (the independent variable). In
the past decade or so, this has ceased to be true. Scholars working on a range
of empirical issues have begun to emphasize that ‘policies produce politics’”
(Pierson 1994, 39). Unions, for example, can grow in number and become
more politically salient due to regulations establishing mandatory registering.
Similarly, social policies can group together recipients that will act in defense
of their newly acquired benefits.
    If the effects of experts’ sponsored policies bring large portions of the popu-
lation into contact with the state, the perceived political costs of poor outputs
increases. If policies now affect a large number of vocal citizens (such as middle
and high classes) who cannot “exit” these new regulations, then state action,
or inaction, becomes more relevant for the citizenry. As such, technical auton-
omy is less likely to be violated. Politicians feel obliged to signal the population
their commitment to responsible policy by appointing technocrats or keeping
experts in their positions.
    Important differences between economic and health policy exist with respect
to these political costs. Mistakes in economic policy carry heavy and immedi-
ate political costs (Kaufman and Nelson 2004, 13).Typically, when the econ-
omy is well it doesn’t garner attention. But the moment an economic crisis
begins to brew, it catches the attention of the population. The public in general
suffers the consequences of economic irresponsibility, a lesson widely learned
in the region after the hyperinflationary crises of the eighties. Rich and middle
classes cannot insulate themselves from the consequences of these poor pol-
icies. Furthermore, as discussed later, influential societal actors, such as the
private sector, that have a major stake in economic policy will raise their voice
privately and in the media if the economy is not properly managed. The politi-
cal opposition can also exploit this political outcry. Therefore, politicians think
twice before appointing political cronies or under-qualified individuals in tech-
nical areas. Even if using economic ministries for patronage remains attrac-
tive to politicians, the hyperinflationary crisis of the late eighties raised the
perceived costs and risks of politicizing management of the economy. In Peru,
the catastrophic effects of hyperinflation taught Peruvians about the need for
responsible macroeconomic policy. Incumbents prefer to claim credit for ade-
quate management of a policy area than to risk their stability for potential and
uncertain electoral goals. Due to widespread learning from bitter experience,
contemporary economic technocrats faced fewer threats from the incumbent.
46                                Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

    In contrast, public health remains a sector in which political intervention
carries lower costs. Although public health affects many individuals in society,
the poor have the most at stake (Kaufman and Nelson 2004, 13; Nelson 2004,
39–41). In the region, the wealthy are covered by private health systems and
do not have to deal with public health, and those formally employed within
the middle classes usually have some sort of insurance provided by state social
security (O’Donnell 1996, 10–12). In Hirschman’s words, rich and middle class
sectors can “exit” to private services rather than demanding a better health ser-
vice (Hirschman 1970). The costs of maintaining the status quo are also low,
as citizens have grown accustomed to a poor-quality health system and do not
blame the incumbent for this outcome. Poor health policy is difficult to trace to
the incumbent. Further, epidemics are likely to affect more vulnerable sectors
of the population, limiting the effect of health crisis over the perceived polit-
ical costs. A health system in crisis has been an everyday fact of life for many
Latin Americans, but rarely has it generated significant backlash for politicians.
Therefore, the costs to the incumbent of delivering mediocre health care are
relatively low.
    Furthermore, the political benefits incumbents can gain from health reforms
are uncertain because the positive effects of the reforms may take a long time
to become apparent, while the costs of initiating reforms, such as antagonizing
unionized health care providers, manifest themselves in the short term (Nelson
1999, 16–22; Kaufman and Nelson 2004, 11–14). At the same time, the incum-
bent can gain significant benefits from maintaining direct political control of
the health system given its abundant potential patronage resources consisting
of jobs for party loyalists and the politically targeted distribution of health
services (Kaufman and Nelson 2004; Nelson 2004, 38–39). As a result, health
is an area in which experts remain more threatened by politicians.
    Nonetheless, policy feedback can contribute to enhance political costs in
health policy sectors. Variation in this factor helps to explain the intermedi-
ate outcome in the second Colombian health policy episode, a less likely area
for technical autonomy. By incorporating both the formally employed and the
poor into a single health system, the Colombian health reform increased the
political cost of delivering poor-quality health policy as formal workers were
now concerned with public health and were unwilling to tolerate patronage or
irresponsible politics in the health sector. Although this cost is not as high as in
economic areas, these higher costs contributed to the significant continuity of
technical expertise in the second Colombian episode.
    It is easier to provide evidence that growing policy-area concerns within
the population lead to technical appointments. Media attention as well as
the saliency of the issue in polls can be linked with technical appointments,
as seen in the second Colombian health episode when the area became more
technocratic in the face of a growing financial crisis in the sector. But provid-
ing evidence that politicians restrained themselves from intervening in policy
areas is difficult because the observable implication of such conduct is inaction.
A Theory of Technocratic Autonomy                                               47

By itself, inaction does not support such a mechanism. It could also indicate
­commitment to technical policy as part of responsible leadership, which is how
 most politicians in Colombia and Peru portray the decision to appoint experts
 and accept technocrats’ proposals. When interviewed for this book, for exam-
 ple, former President Gaviria concluded that making sensible economic policy
 through experts was part of Colombian leaders’ political culture (interview
 with C. Gaviria 2013). Although some leaders do have a genuine commitment
 to the common good, my point is that there is not consistently similar restraint
 across other policy areas. Something more than just politicians’ “better angels”
 guides them when handling the economy, especially in the years when technoc-
 racy was not as entrenched as it is today in Colombia or Peru.
    So we are left with the question: What is the evidence that leaders restrained
 themselves due to a risk assessment? Apart from several politicians who have
 accepted that concerns about the political consequences of poor policy do drive
 technical picks and respect for technical decisions, in the following chapters I
 also highlight how technical advisors on the campaign trail and ministerial
 appointments once in office are often portrayed by politicians as signals to the
 population of policy responsibility. Additionally, a change in conduct of lead-
 ers who were former critics of technical policies, but once in office supported
 technical continuity, also counts as evidence of this risk assessment. In the fol-
 lowing chapters we find leaders that bowed to technocracy even if they were
 harsh critics of technocrats before they had won office.
    In conclusion, experts are more insulated from political pressures in areas
 where public policy can cause immediate and noticeable effects that hurt large
 segments of the population. In those areas, experts can exercise greater auton-
 omy that is less vulnerable to being violated following changes of government
 or clashes between experts and political interests. Although political costs tend
 to be quite stable across time, they also can change because of certain trau-
 matic events such as crises, and policy itself can also raise the potential costs
 of intervention.

Constellation of Stakeholders
A second contextual factor that explains variation in the existence and degree
of technocratic autonomy across state agencies is the constellation of stake-
holders related to each policy sector. The balance of power among important
actors plays a crucial role for enhancing technical autonomy and promoting its
entrenchment over time. Particularly, a balanced constellation opens space for
experts, allowing them to exercise their power with lower risk of retaliation.
   I define stakeholders more loosely than do most theories of public policy.
The conventional view is that stakeholders are citizens, interest groups, or asso-
ciations benefited or harmed by particular policies (Graham et al. 1999, 9). I
use “stakeholder” more broadly to refer to social, economic, or political actors
with strong preferences and interests (“stakes”) in a policy area. Under this
definition, private firms and business associations are among the additional
48                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

socioeconomic actors included as stakeholders. Similarly, IFIs that participate
actively in the issue area and make policy prescriptions will also be relevant
actors. Even the political opposition counts as a stakeholder due to its interest
in preventing incumbents from politicizing policy sectors.
   I argue that a plural and balanced constellation of powerful stakeholders
enhances technical autonomy by (1) providing experts with more space to
adopt their own policy decisions and (2) increasing the likelihood that experts’
strategies to advance their policy preferences will succeed. As discussed in the
following section, this balanced constellation of stakeholders also raises the
chances that technical autonomy becomes entrenched over time.
   Cross-pressures from a plurality of powerful stakeholders bolster experts’
autonomy. The logic behind this argument is that as the fragmentation of pow-
erful actors surrounding a policy sector increases, it becomes more difficult for
a single actor to control experts, thereby opening space for autonomy. Diverse
powerful stakeholders provide different and contrasting preferences regarding
policy options, which balance each other out. Stakeholders act as veto players
who prevent competing actors from controlling the policy area. In areas where
this constellation of powerful actors is balanced, the incumbents are aware that
pushing experts too hard to adopt their preferences may cause a backlash from
influential stakeholders, such as the political opposition, business, or IFIs, who
would ideally prefer to control these policy agencies themselves. Yet when such
direct control is not possible, these actors see experts as a second best option,
especially if the most likely alternative is political control by the incumbent.
The informal but firm control these stakeholders exercise over the incumbent
and each other provides insulation for technocrats. Técnicos benefit from this
space and adopt decisions according to their own preferences with less fear of
being punished by other actors.
   Similar theories are used in political science to explain diverse instances in
which political actors gain autonomy from other socioeconomic and political
forces. Riesman argues that the existence of plural interest groups in the mod-
ern United States precludes the possibility that a particular group controls the
government, and gives it considerable autonomy (Riesman 1950, 235–255).
Rustow explains the adoption of democratic institutions in modern Europe as
a consequence of the stalemate between aristocratic and labor forces. A demo-
cratic regime does not guarantee the preferred options of either labor or aristo-
cratic forces, but it is a reasonable “second best” option for both sides (Rustow
1970). Similarly, pluralist theories of judicial autonomy find a balanced and
competitive party system to be a necessary condition for the emergence of
independent judiciaries that make decisions free of political influence in the
developing world (Ginsburg 2003; Magaloni 2003; Bill Chávez 2004; Ríos
Figueroa 2007). These authors stress that political competitiveness provides
space for the growth and expansion of judicial autonomy as equally powerful
political forces check each other, preventing any one from gaining control of
the courts. More closely related to the topic at hand, Evelyne Huber argues that
A Theory of Technocratic Autonomy                                                             49

a balanced civil society, with “divisions in the dominant classes and pressures
from subordinate classes,” contributes to state autonomy in Latin America
(Huber 1995, 173).3
   A balanced constellation of stakeholders provides experts with enough
political space to adopt their preferences. In contrast, where there is only one
powerful actor, usually the incumbent, this actor has an easier time opposing
technical policies that affect its interest. If defiance by experts is strong, the
incumbent can punish these technocrats and fire them more easily. Similarly,
an unbalanced constellation of stakeholders where powerful actors join forces
to attack experts will also lower technical autonomy.
   The first set of relevant stakeholders is the political opposition. My expla-
nation is similar to political-incentives theories that highlight the relevance
of plural and similarly strong political actors for state agencies’ autonomy.
These theories tend to correlate state autonomy and state capacity with the
degree of competitiveness of political parties. From this perspective, a more
competitive party system will allow state institutions to gain autonomy and
become more professional by limiting political intervention in bureaucratic
agencies. As mentioned, this literature argues that parity among political par-
ties leads to autonomous judicial bodies. Similarly, Geddes argues that polit-
ical pluralism contributes to professional and independent bureaucracies by
reducing the importance of patronage in electoral politics (Geddes 1994).
For Geddes, balanced political parties were responsible for the administrative
reforms to professionalize the bureaucracy undertaken in Colombia, Uruguay,
and Venezuela.
   As we will see, the political opposition certainly constitutes a check on
incumbents who attempt to clash with technocrats. Experts become a guaran-
tee for political stakeholders that certain policy areas will not be used to the
advantage of the incumbent. In Colombia during the National Front, or during
the last decade in Peru, the political opposition saw economic experts as pro-
tection against a politicized economy. Nonetheless, the episodes I explore also
show that political parity alone cannot explain technical autonomy within the
state. Political pluralism may open more space for bureaucratic professional-
ism in some policy areas but other area remains prone to political interven-
tion. As discussed in the Colombian episodes, institutional autonomy largely
transcends the competitiveness of the party system: a bipartisan system as it
existed in Colombia for decades did not lead to more state professionalism
in the overwhelming majority of bureaucratic agencies.4 In areas that revolve
around the allocation of distributable resources, political competitiveness by

3
    Similarly, Michael Mann finds the source of the state’s autonomy and power in the need to bal-
    ance the diverse interests of social forces within a given territory (Mann 1984).
4
    Similar negative outcomes can be found in two of Geddes’s cases. Neither Venezuela nor Uruguay
    provides enough evidence of bureaucratic independence and professionalism coming into exis-
    tence across the state out of political party parity.
50                                         Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

itself does not seem a sufficient condition to explain technical and professional
state institutions. It appears that equally strong political parties may sometimes
share patronage rather than professionalize the state. In sum, political forces
are only part of the story.
    Socioeconomic interests and international actors sharing interests in a
policy sector also help explain technical autonomy. The presence of power-
ful economic actors with veto power over politicians limits the possibility of
politicians using (or sharing) the spoils of policy areas. Two types of economic
stakeholders are particularly important for explaining technical autonomy:
business interests and IFIs.5 As discussed in the previous chapter, structural per-
spectives are wrong to attribute to business interests or IFIs the power to con-
trol técnicos. But these actors do have policy preferences they try to advance,
frequently in opposition to the incumbent. By doing so, they interact with the
other stakeholders, balance out each others’ preferences, and thus affect tech-
nical autonomy by limiting political intrusion. Experts become “second best”
options for these actors. Technocrats are accountable to more “audiences.” On
one hand they have to take these plural interests into account, but at the same
time. they also gain autonomy from these interests. Although experts may not
implement the exact preferences of these actors, they are considerably better
than allowing these areas to be politically controlled. Other issue areas lacking
a balanced constellation of stakeholders are likely to remain unprofessional.
Table 3.2 presents these differences.
    The balance of power among stakeholders helps to explain the variation
in technical autonomy found in my case studies. Since stakeholders such as
IFIs and business sectors closely scrutinize economic policy making and limit
incumbents’ intrusion, experts in this area have more space to adopt auton-
omous decisions. Stakeholders lobby privately or voice their disagreement
through the media when individuals do not fulfill technical characteristics.
    Health, by contrast, is a sector where there are no similarly powerful stake-
holders. Few actors demand that politicians adopt effective health policies or
restrict them from interfering with technical policies. Apart from businesses
directly involved with the health sector (often more interested in regulations
and distributive goods than in general and adequate policy outcomes), business
actors in general show little interest or involvement in health reform (Nelson
2004, 40–41). Without this pressure, politicians who clash with experts have
little reason not to fire experts and pursue new policies more in accordance
with their own interests.
    The importance of stakeholders for the continuity of technical autonomy
becomes clear in moments when experts are more vulnerable, such as during

5
    IFIs have somehow different “stakes” in a policy sector than do the other actors mentioned.
    Policy outcomes usually will not affect IFIs directly. Nonetheless, I still consider IFIs stakehold-
    ers (in my extended definition) as these institutions have a strong interest in the advancement of
    their preferred policies in line with their institutional goals.
A Theory of Technocratic Autonomy                                                   51

table 3.2. Constellation of Stakeholders

Plural and Balanced           Plural and Unbalanced       Hegemonic Actor
• Diverse powerful actors     • Some of the               • Experts are only
  interested in the policy      stakeholders have           accountable to
  area. Stakeholders act as     similar preferences         one powerful
  checks and balances for       and these preferences       actor, usually the
  one another, protecting       oppose those of             incumbent. In the
  technical autonomy as         experts.                    event of conflict,
  “second best” option.       • Few stakeholders            experts lack external
• Experts can use               support experts’            support to safeguard
  stakeholders as allies        strategies.                 their autonomy.
  in order to advance         • Prediction: Technocrats   • Few or no
  technocrats’ preferred        are more vulnerable to      stakeholders to serve
  policies.                     intrusion.                  as allies of experts.
• Prediction: Experts                                     • Prediction: Highly
  have more space to                                        vulnerable to
  adopt their own policy                                    intrusion and
  decisions. Increases the                                  dependent on the
  likelihood of success                                     incumbent’s will.
  of experts’ strategies
  to advance their policy
  preferences.



changes of administration or clashes with incumbents. The pressure on the
incumbent to maintain technical management in economic institutions is evi-
dent during the days preceding the appointment of a new economics minis-
ter. As shown in the two economic episodes with high technical autonomy
(Colombia 1958–2013 and Peru 1990–2013), stakeholders make it clear that
they prefer a well-educated appointee with economic credentials who can
guarantee technical quality and continuity. Particularly, when a technical min-
ister is dismissed, economic analysts and risk assessment agencies immediately
comment in the media about the dangers for stability if the incumbent appoints
a minister without such credentials. Experts are guarantors of stakeholders’
interests and these strong actors demand clear signs of continuity. Once a tech-
nical minister is nominated, these actors produce reports emphasizing how the
pick is adequate for economic stability.
    By contrast, the fall of health experts due to clashes with politicians usually
goes largely unnoticed. In the absence of powerful stakeholders, these events
are criticized mainly by a few other health experts who share the perspective
of the ousted official. Other powerful actors and the public at large remain
unmoved by these events. Therefore, the costs of firing experts and not replac-
ing them with qualified individuals are much lower. In consequence, politi-
cians’ latitude to change policy and personnel in health agencies is higher than
52                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

in economic ones. Clashes with politicians can result in a considerable loss of
technical expertise.
    The health policy episodes provide additional evidence of stakeholders’
­relevance for technical autonomy. The enhancement of health expertise docu-
 mented in my the episodes in the 1990s was linked to moments in which IFIs
 and other international stakeholders promoted health policy reforms. By doing
 so they increased politicians’ need for health expertise and allowed experts
 some autonomy for making decisions. As discussed in the Peruvian episode,
 IFIs’ declining interest in health reform at the end of the nineties harmed
 experts’ autonomy.
    On the other hand, in the first Peruvian economic episode (1980–1983), I
 show how an unbalanced constellation of stakeholders can affect economic
 technocrats. Although experts in MEF initially had considerable influence,
 powerful political and business actors who opposed their orthodox economic
 reforms eventually defeated them. After the debt crisis and, especially, the eco-
 nomic meltdown of the late 1980s, a stronger consensus in economic policy
 and more balanced constellation of stakeholders emerged with the result of
 increasing the chances for technical autonomy. In clear contrast to the previ-
 ous experience of the 1980s, technocratic autonomy in economic policy has
 persisted in Peru.
    A second way in which a plural and balanced constellation of stakeholders
 increases technical autonomy is by making experts’ strategies to advance their
 preferences considerably more effective. As mentioned, sometimes experts play
 stakeholders off against each other and establish alliances with them accord-
 ing to the issues under consideration. Experts can evaluate the preferences of
 various stakeholders and use them to counteract the pressure they receive from
 different quarters.
    Several examples in this book show such strategic action. As discussed,
 when politicians are not responsive to their preferences, técnicos can secretly
 ask IFIs to exercise leverage over the government. Or they can ask these institu-
 tions to demand that only highly qualified individuals are appointed to ongo-
 ing reform projects, thus limiting political manipulation of externally funded
 projects. Experts can also establish links with business associations or even the
 political opposition to advance their proposals. Alternatively, they can seek
 the support of other social actors, such as the media, think tanks, or interest
 groups to counterbalance political pressures.
    The range of potential allies is greater for some technocrats than for others.
 Economic técnicos have much more room to maneuver. Some business associa-
 tions can ally with experts in the effort to overcome resistance to particular
 reforms emanating from politicians or other business sectors. For example,
 exporters can support experts’ efforts to open the economy, against the inter-
 ests of protectionist business sectors. Or IFIs can finance pilot projects, such
 as developing more transparent budgets or new systems of financial account-
 ability, that the incumbent is not willing or interested in funding. In health, by
A Theory of Technocratic Autonomy                                               53

contrast, the incumbent is the dominant interest. Usually only IFIs, ­international
organizations involved in health policy, and some local NGOs have a sustained
interest in the public health system. The result is that health experts have fewer
stakeholders to play against one another.
   Summing up, the previous two “politics of policy” factors explain varia-
tion in technocratic autonomy. These factors allow us to identify policy areas
where technical autonomy is likely to be high and others where it is expected
to remain lower. Elevated political costs and powerful actors with interests in
a policy area enhance technocratic autonomy by limiting political intrusion.
In contrast, if these political costs are low and the constellation of stakehold-
ers surrounding a policy area is unbalanced or dominated by a single political
actor, technocratic autonomy will remain more vulnerable. As discussed later,
these two factors are not only fundamental in explaining technical autonomy
but also entrenchment. In areas where these factors are absent, political clashes,
or mere political rotation, can abruptly change existing patterns of autonomy.
These two factors account for the broad patterns observed in the two policy
areas I contrast in this work: economic policy and health policy.


Technical Aspects of Policy
Two other factors related to the technical aspects of policy also affect expert
autonomy: technical complexity and experts’ consensus. These factors aug-
ment experts’ autonomy by limiting political intrusion in technical policy areas
and enhancing experts’ legitimacy. When these factors are absent, they contrib-
ute to weaken technical autonomy even in “more likely” policy areas such as
economics. And where present, they contribute to autonomy in less likely pol-
icy areas such as health. Additionally, these factors contribute to explain varia-
tion in technical autonomy in the same policy area across time. After discussing
these two factors, I explain why they are less crucial for technical autonomy
than are the previous two.

Technical Complexity
Technical complexity also shapes variation in technical autonomy. Experts
are more autonomous in sectors in which the level of technical qualifications
required to understand policy making is higher. Complexity increases the
asymmetry between técnicos and other actors, which is at the base of experts’
autonomy, and thus limits intervention in these policy areas. Complexity
also makes it more difficult to foresee the consequences of policy choices.
As discussed above, if policy consequences are difficult to foresee, political
intervention becomes more risky than in policy areas in which these con-
sequences are easier to grasp (Barnett and Finnemore 1999; Nelkin 1975,
36–37). Politicians and sociopolitical actors have more difficulty evaluating
the likely costs and benefits of policy decisions and thus rely more on experts’
assessments.
54                                 Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

table 3.3. Technical Complexity

High Complexity                                 Low Complexity
• Specialized scientific knowledge enhances     • Non-specialized scientific
  technical asymmetry between experts and         knowledge is easier to understand
  politicians.                                    by non-technically trained
• Technical complexity makes political            individuals, such as politicians.
  costs more difficult to evaluate by           • Potential political costs are
  politicians. The consequences of decisions      easier to evaluate. Politicians
  related to the provision of public goods        are able to more easily grasp the
  are more difficult to grasp by non-trained      consequences of decisions related
  individuals.                                    to the distribution of particular
• Prediction: Higher thresholds for political     goods.
  intrusion in technical policy areas and       • Prediction: Political intrusion is
  enhanced expert legitimacy.                     more likely.


   What makes some types of knowledge and policy choices more complex
than others? As shown in Table 3.3 two aspects are relevant to evaluate this
complexity. First, the more specialized the scientific knowledge needed to
understand the available policy options, the more complex the policy area.
This level of complexity partly depends on how experts believe the issue area
can be analyzed scientifically and how generalized this belief is among other
actors. The more prone to modeling and quantification, the easier it is for tech-
nical practitioners to exclude other non-trained actors in a policy area through
the use of specialized concepts and vocabulary. In order to be considered sci-
entific, these “languages” must adhere to norms of internal coherence. This
technical jargon limits who can participate in policy debates. Statistics, econo-
metrics, and mathematics are all powerful mechanisms to exclude uninitiated
individuals who cannot counter experts’ assessments with similar evaluations
(Grindle and Thomas 1991, 61).
   Similarly, the consequences of policy choices for particular goods are less
complex and therefore easier to foresee than are the consequences of decisions
related to public goods. Specifically, when the technical debates are focused on
budget allocations to particular services and programs with identifiable benefi-
ciaries, actors such as politicians have a better grasp of the immediate conse-
quences of those decisions for their interests. This assessment is more difficult
in areas in which each decision requires a high degree of specialization and
decisions themselves have broader effects not traceable to particular benefi-
ciaries. These complex decisions determine the future availability of resources
and public goods, issues difficult to foresee by an untrained individual. In the
following chapters I evaluate the degree of technical complexity by analyzing
the type of knowledge demanded in order to elaborate policy proposals in the
issue area under consideration, and to participate in debates about the content
and effects of policies.
A Theory of Technocratic Autonomy                                                55

   This factor is important for understanding the different levels of autonomy
prevailing in economic policy versus those in health policy. Politicians have a
harder time assessing the implications of economic policy decisions. Economic
policy is a complex, highly formalized discipline that requires mathematical
and statistical skills. Determining adequate responses to economic crises or
predicting the precise consequences of public spending on inflation are all pol-
icy decisions that largely escape the understanding of politicians. These limita-
tions become more evident in moments of uncertainty, when wrong decisions
risk deepening the economic problems of the country. Economic policy remains
obscure and inaccessible for politicians.
   In contrast, health policy is more accessible to political actors and associa-
tions of professionals working in the health sector (e.g., doctors and nurses).
Even if health policy has become more complex in recent decades, especially
after the emergence of the highly technical health economics approach in the
1990s, it remains less complex than is economic policy with effects that are
more easily understood. Debates about health policy often involve decisions
affecting the allocation of divisible patronage resources, a topic on which inter-
ested parties will certainly have opinions. As such, it is more difficult to exclude
political actors from health policy debates.
   A policy sector’s technical complexity can vary across time, thereby enhanc-
ing or reducing experts’ ability to marginalize other actors from policy making.
The episodes I discuss clearly show this variation. In the 1960s, Colombian
economic experts had the advantage of commanding expertise in the country
when no other actors had similar capabilities. By raising the technical level
required for understanding policy making, Colombian experts gained bargain-
ing leverage vis-à-vis other economic “experts” (usually lawyers) linked to
political parties and business interests (Cepeda Ulloa and Mitchell 1980). In the
1980s, Peruvian experts lacked a similar advantage because there were trained
economists with alternative perspectives who could question their reform pro-
posals on technical grounds. The health policy episodes also show how com-
plex knowledge excludes other non-technical actors from policy making. As
mentioned, the spread of the health economics approach in the 1990s made
health policy significantly more complex, marginalizing other actors such as
politicians and doctors.

Experts’ Consensus
A second factor linked to experts’ knowledge that boosts technocratic auton-
omy is consensual expertise. Expertise becomes a more effective resource for
gaining independence and influence when experts agree on what constitutes
adequate policy. When there is strong agreement among experts regarding
how to properly diagnosis social problems and about which solutions look
promising, an “epistemic community” exists: “a network of professionals with
recognized expertise and competence in a particular domain and an authori-
tative claim to policy-relevant knowledge within that domain or issue area”
56                                        Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

(Haas 1992, 3).6 This consensus enhances experts’ leverage by making the
­technical policy options they advocate look largely unchallenged by other
 experts. Technical legitimacy is firmly grounded in the informed opinion of
 other experts. Disagreements among technocrats are limited to smaller points
 that do not threaten the dominant paradigm.
    When there is consensus among technocrats, politicians are more con-
 strained to appoint only technically trained individuals to policy-making insti-
 tutions. If politicians make decisions that deviate from this consensus, such as
 appointing an unqualified individual, these decisions can easily be condemned
 as irresponsible or politicized. Even if politicians decide to replace particular
 experts, they are forced to appoint new individuals with similar preferences.
 Disputes with politicians, then, can lead to changes of individual experts, but
 not to the appointment of less-qualified individuals or a broad change in policy
 prescriptions.
    In contrast, when this consensus is lacking, divisions within technical ranks
 can be used by political and/or societal actors to weaken technical autonomy.
 These actors have a choice and can select técnicos aligned with their own pref-
 erences, rather than having to accept the preferences that experts consensually
 hold. In this way, politicians limit experts’ claim to hold positions representing
 what is commonsensical in their professions, and turn technical debates into
 political ones, with politicians using “their” experts to advance their preferred
 alternatives (Nelkin 1975, 40–41, 54).
    Geddes notes that “in most countries, political leaders can find economic
 experts who will advocate a wide range of policy prescriptions.” Thus, “if one
 set of policies leads to opposition, the economists who proposed it can be
 replaced by others who will advocate more politically palatable ones” (Geddes
 1995, 210–211). Geddes is right to point out that this divided camp of experts
 is normal in diverse countries. But the episodes I explore show that the avail-
 ability of experts with diverse views is not as universal as assumed by the
 author. Experts’ consensus can limit political choices for alternative experts
 who hold visions closer to politicians’ interests.
    How do we know in advance whether or not there is technical consensus
 in a policy area? Two aspects are relevant to answer this question (Table 3.4).

6
    The full definition of an epistemic community includes the following specification: “Although an
    epistemic community may consist of professionals from a variety of disciplines and backgrounds,
    they have (1) a shared set of normative and principled beliefs, which provide a value-based ratio-
    nale for the social action of community members; (2) shared causal beliefs, which are derived
    from their analysis of practices leading or contributing to a central set of problems in their
    domain and which then serve as the basis of elucidating the multiple linkages between possible
    policy actions and desired outcomes; (3) shared notions of validity – that is, inter-subjective,
    internally defined criteria for weighing and validating knowledge in the domain of their exper-
    tise; and (4) a common policy enterprise – that is, a set of common practices associated with a set
    of problems to which their professional competence is directed, presumably out of the conviction
    that human welfare will be enhanced as a consequence” (Haas 1992, 3).
A Theory of Technocratic Autonomy                                                     57

table 3.4. Technical Consensus

High Consensus                             Low Consensus
• Less debate about the adequacy of        • Alternative technical responses to the
  implemented policies.                      same issue are available.
• Limits the availability of alternative   • Experts with different policy option
  experts with policy options that are       perspectives that are closer to the
  closer to the incumbent’s preferences.     incumbent’s preferences are available
• Prediction: Stronger legitimacy            for the incumbent to choose from.
  of experts’ recipes and increased        • Prediction: Experts’ legitimacy
  likelihood of continuity.                  is weaker; higher possibility of
                                             intervention.



Strong disagreements between the leading practitioners of the discipline about
the central aspects of policymaking and policy priorities, such as where to allo-
cate resources, indicate low levels of consensus. In contrast, well-established
consensus about policy issues, including what constitutes responsible policies
or where to direct resources, indicates a considerable degree of consensus.
There may be disagreements about other aspects of policy making, but a solid
set that provides common ground for experts assures a more unified front in
an issue policy area.
   Technical consensus is of upmost importance for explaining the variation
found across countries in economic and health sectors and over time in the
economic episodes in Peru. In the 1970s and 1980s, there were clearly diver-
gent approaches to economic policy in Peru, and most of Latin America more
generally, which gave politicians the option of choosing from among different
economic recipes. As a result, the fall from power of orthodox experts in Peru
during the early 1980s was facilitated greatly by disagreements with heterodox
economists. Politicians and business associations used other experts to delegiti-
mize technocrats’ reforms.
   Nowadays, broad agreement on what constitutes adequate economic policy
prevails in the region, partly as a result of the damaging effects caused by the
debt crisis of the 1980s (Montecinos, Markoff, and Álvarez-Rivadulla 2010,
15–17). The same orthodox and heterodox experts whose approaches to eco-
nomic policy had little common ground two decades ago now share many
assumptions, goals, and policy instruments. Although other economic issues
remain disputed (e.g., privatizations, labor law, the use of subsidies for pro-
moting industries, etc.), this consensus among experts highlights the need to
maintain fiscal equilibrium, control patronage spending, and avoid inflationary
pressures (Silva 1991, 405–406; Centeno and Silva 1998, 11–12). Politicians
cannot appoint alternative experts who would be profligate.
   Considerable technical consensus in economics has existed in Colombia
since the time of the National Front. This common ground among Colombian
58                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

experts partly explains the early emergence of technocracy in that country.
For more than forty years, the Ministry of Finance has pursued a generally
consistent set of economic policies even under turbulent political conditions.
In Peru, such a consensus emerged after the hyperinflationary crisis of the late
1980s when the excesses of heterodox policies discredited it as an alternative
to neoliberal economic policy. In both countries, politicians are now informally
required to appoint officials that are committed to this consensus. A purely
political appointment is not likely to be tolerated.
   In contrast to economic policy, there is more limited agreement among
experts in the health sector (Kaufman and Nelson 2004, 12–13). Public health
policy has a long history of strong disagreements about what constitutes an
adequate approach. Up until the 1960s, health policy prescriptions recom-
mended the creation of a single social security system to provide health care
in developing countries. Starting in the late 1960s, a new approach challenged
this traditional prescription by questioning the regressive effects of alleged uni-
versal systems: these “universal” policies focused on the urban and formally
employed population, leaving out the worst-off in society, such as those living
in rural areas or those informally employed (Ewig 2010, ch. 2). Gradually, this
new approach earned the support of the World Health Organization (WHO)
and became known as “primary health care.” From the primary health care
perspective, it is more efficient to prevent illness by improving the living and
nutritional conditions of the population than to cure it later or invest in expen-
sive medical equipment. As a consequence, the WHO recommended substan-
tial reforms promoting preventive policies, communal work, and decentralized
allocation of technical and human resources to those sectors most in need
(Cueto 2004,1868). Under the motto “Health for All by the Year 2000,” the
WHO’s 1978 Alma Ata declaration promoted primary health care globally
(Cueto 2004).
   But this approach did not remain unchallenged. Other experts questioned
primary health care for its broadness and for lacking specific, measurable
goals. A more restricted version, selective primary health care, emerged in
the eighties. This perspective also proposed focusing resources on the needy,
but left aside some universalistic goals of the original primary health care
model (Cueto 2004). Health economics emerged as a natural complement to
this approach: only economic knowledge could properly assess which sectors
needed resources the most and then determine where they should be allocated.
When the World Bank launched its influential campaign for public health
reform in the late eighties, it embraced a restricted version of selective primary
health care, stressing the importance of health economics for policy imple-
mentation (Ewig 2010, 68–73). In its leading publications Financing Health
Services in Developing Countries: An Agenda of Reform (1987) and World
Development Report: Investing in Health (1993) the World Bank prescribed
focusing on those sectors of the population that could not be covered by the
market (Ewig 2010, 69–71).
A Theory of Technocratic Autonomy                                                           59

   All these approaches coexisted in Latin America during the nineties (Franco
1996; Arroyo 2000, 73–75, 161; Yglesias 1999). Frequently, health experts
disagreed on which solution or policy to privilege. Choosing priorities, how-
ever, becomes a political decision because certain social groups will benefit
more than will others depending on the chosen policy (Kaufman and Nelson
2004, 12–13; Nelson 2004, 31). This lack of agreement about priorities leads
to harsh criticism and conflict among experts, opening the door for political
intrusion and sometimes dramatic changes from administration to administra-
tion. Evidence of these disagreements is found in the different evaluations of
policy reforms in both countries. Reconstructing health reforms through inter-
views sometimes felt like watching Rashomon,7 as the successes highlighted
by one group of experts were described as failures by experts with a differ-
ent ideological or policy orientation. These discrepancies among experts have
affected the stability of technical expertise in health policy areas.
   Although these conflicting views still exist, health experts’ positions have
converged in the last decade. A significant level of agreement has emerged
around a soft version of selective primary health care. This nascent consen-
sus is less solid than is the existing consensus in economics, but it nevertheless
reduces conflict among experts. Even sectors that demanded broad and uni-
versal systems of health coverage in the eighties now recognize the constraints
imposed by resource limitations (Nelson 2004, 29–30). Health economics has
become increasingly important in defining and solving the resource limitation
challenges of public health. This consensus is now partially endorsed by insti-
tutions such as the World Health Organization (WHO) and the Pan American
Health Organization (PAHO), and has provided some common ground to
these technical debates. This change explains why the conditions for technical
autonomy in health policy within both countries are now more favorable than
they were in the past, although disagreements are still more prevalent than they
are in economic policy.
   These two factors enhance technical autonomy by further reducing the
incumbent’s chances of politicizing a technical policy sector. Higher levels of
technical autonomy are expected in policy areas of technical complexity and
where there is expert consensus. By contrast, where these factors are not pre-
sent, technical autonomy is more vulnerable to political interference. As dis-
cussed in the episodes I explore, these two factors contribute to explain why
expertise failed to entrench in the Ministry of Economics in Peru in the early
eighties, even though it represented a more likely case for technical autonomy.
Additionally, they help us to understand why Colombian and Peruvian health
experts achieved more continuity in the nineties than was expected in a policy
area in which experts were less likely to experience technical autonomy.


7
    In Akira Kurosawa’s Rashomon different characters narrate the same incident. Each one of the
    characters provides a very different account of this same incident.
60                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

   Why are these two factors, associated with the technical aspects of policy,
of less importance for technical autonomy than are the previous two? The
primary answer is that they have little effect on autonomy where there are no
perceived political costs of poor policy performance, or if the policy area lacks
a balanced constellation of stakeholders. To begin with, no matter how much
complexity or consensus, politicians would not have the urgency to strengthen
policy areas in charge of these issues. And if they do appoint experts, they
would not be worried about the political consequences of intervening in these
areas because the population are not that interested in these policy areas.
Further, the technical and scientific communities where experts come from do
not present a similar impediment to external interventions as does a balanced
constellation of powerful stakeholders, no matter how much consensus exists
within these communities. Scientific offices and/or special projects of a highly
complex nature can be dismantled with little public awareness and with no
strong actors opposing these decisions. These factors by themselves do not
favor the emergence of strong and autonomous policy areas nor ensure their
long-term stability, thereby limiting experts’ latitude to make policy, in the case
that they do emerge.


Technical Entrenchment and the Fall of Experts
In areas where these favorable conditions are present, experts are more likely to
gain technical entrenchment. Technical entrenchment occurs when politicians
are informally constrained to continually reappoint experts in certain policy
areas. When the precedent of appointing technical ministers in the economic
area has become the norm, as is currently the case in Colombia and Peru, nam-
ing an unqualified individual to a high-level economic position carries extreme
political costs; politicians need to signal their commitment to technical conti-
nuity or face the consequences. Speculation about who will become minister of
economics usually focuses around a small number of acceptable individuals for
the position. In contrast, policy sectors where these conditions are not present,
such as health, are much less likely to produce such entrenchment, and techni-
cal autonomy remains weak.
   Interestingly, the passage of time by itself does not produce this entrenchment
in health policy areas. Peruvian health experts achieved considerable conti-
nuity but they remained vulnerable. Why do some experts achieve technical
entrenchment while others fail to do so? And how do these areas with strong
technical autonomy lose their insulation and professional technical level?
   The aforementioned factors contribute to the explanation of why technical
expertise becomes entrenched. Under these positive conditions, experts’ strat-
egies to increase the formal and informal requirements for expertise in policy
areas are more likely to succeed. Technocrats can use their authority to adopt
rules and regulations that enhance their power. In addition, they gain legiti-
macy as their authority becomes less disputed. Over time, other state actors
A Theory of Technocratic Autonomy                                               61

also have to learn how to communicate in technical terms, further legitimizing
technocrats’ knowledge. Although when present the four factors contribute to
technical stability and facilitate experts’ strategies to gain autonomy, the first
two factors – political costs of poor policy performance and constellation of
stakeholders – are especially relevant to understanding why experts’ position
in the state sometimes produces entrenchment.
   First, if a significant portion of the population perceives experts as guar-
antors of prudent policy, the political costs of firing these experts is high.
Politicians’ capacity to subordinate experts in this situation is therefore lim-
ited. If crises are linked to previous non-technical, patronage-driven policy
making, then politicians are under close scrutiny to send a clear message of
responsibility by maintaining experts in their positions. And as mentioned
before, experts’ sponsored policies can also expand the section of the popula-
tion that is interested in experts’ continuity, thus making entrenchment more
likely.
   Second, a balanced constellation of powerful stakeholders is fundamental
to technical entrenchment. Different authors discuss how and why powerful
actors become active defenders of institutional stability and continuity (Pierson
1994; 2000; North 1990; 1995; Levitsky and Murillo 2009; M. Johnson,
forthcoming). As highlighted by Levitsky and Murillo, “When institutional
arrangements persist (and are enforced) over time, surviving repeated crises
and changes of government, actors develop expectations of stability and con-
sequently invest in skills, technologies, and organizations that are appropriate
to those institutions” (2009, 123). Similarly, North concludes that “political
institutions will be stable only if they are supported by organizations with an
interest in their perpetuation” (North 1995, 25).
   Powerful stakeholders, such as business interests and IFIs, see technocrats
as guarantors of institutional arrangements. Technocrats are responsible for
enforcing and guaranteeing the respect of institutions. Technocrats act as cred-
ible commitments for stakeholders that policies will be predictable and the
status quo maintained. Technocratic stability makes stakeholders expect policy
stability and act accordingly, thereby giving these actors greater stakes in insti-
tutional and organizational continuity. They become more vociferous defend-
ers of technical continuity and the status quo, producing more support for the
prevailing institutional arrangements (Pierson 2000, 259). As such, technical
areas are also informally protected by these powerful stakeholders that are
interested in institutional continuity.
   As mentioned previously, experts’ policies can enhance the power of some
of these stakeholders, or even create new stakeholders, increasing the constel-
lation of actors supporting technical autonomy. Policy can change the balance
of power among different interest groups in society, enhancing the power of
those who benefit from experts’ regulations and reducing the influence of those
negatively affected by it (Pierson 1994, 43–44; 2000, 259). These changes in
political actors’ power can contribute to technical continuity.
62                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

     As discussed in the second Peruvian economic episode, the continuous
a­ pplication of market reforms has increased the power of business sectors
 privileged by this new institutional arrangement: exporters, mining interests,
 and financial institutions. This greater influence has produced stronger pri-
 vate actors, while politicians have simultaneously lost power in the country.
 As such, the support for experts has increased. Similarly, in the second health
 policy episode in Colombia, health reforms created new stakeholders (health
 providers and purchasers) within the system that counterbalanced the power
 of the incumbent and opened up more space for technical autonomy.
     Nonetheless, even in cases where technical autonomy is stable, it can, under
 certain conditions, reduce drastically as technocrats succumb to political con-
 flict. In Argentina, technocrats in the Ministry of Economics were considered
 strong and influential, only to be dismissed by Néstor Kirchner in the early
 2000s, after a series of events that had weakened their position. Kirchner con-
 siderably subordinated the ministry to his political interests by appointing less
 qualified personnel and taking away some of its power, a trend followed by
 his wife and successor Cristina Fernández de Kirchner. Similarly, following his
 election in 2005, Evo Morales politicized the Bolivian Ministry of Economics,
 widely held as a technical policy area (although, as discussed in the conclu-
 sion, to a considerably lesser degree than in the Argentinean and Venezuelan
 cases). Finally, and although not an economic case, during the bipartisan Pacto
 de Punto Fijo, democratic Venezuela witnessed a highly technical bureaucracy
 emerge in PDVSA, the state oil company. These bureaucratic elite were dis-
 missed in 2002 after Hugo Chávez clashed with the agency during his second
 government.
     How did these technical actors lose their power even though their auton-
 omy was widely seen as stable? In the conclusion, I discuss more thoroughly
 these three episodes of technocratic demise to illustrate the conditions under
 which even entrenched experts can lose control over policy. The two politics
 of policy factors are also fundamental in explaining these outcomes. First,
 an acute crisis traced to technocrats’ policies can reduce the political costs of
 dismissing experts, allowing politicians to intervene in technical policy areas
 without having to face high political costs. If experts with alternative policy
 prescriptions are available, the decision to intervene is even easier. And if eco-
 nomic conditions ameliorate (e.g., a positive change as a result of external
 economic conditions), the risks of intervention for the incumbent are even
 lower. Second, when the constellation of stakeholders becomes unbalanced,
 either by a concentration of power by the incumbent or an alliance of several
 powerful actors that oppose experts’ policies, experts become more vulnera-
 ble. If the incumbent concentrates power, and IFIs and business actors weaken
 or have fewer mechanisms of pressure on the government, experts are vulner-
 able. While each of these factors can have independent effects, they can also
 occur simultaneously. Under such conditions, we can witness abrupt technical
 decline.
A Theory of Technocratic Autonomy                                              63

   These cases of technocratic demise show how acute social problems that
delegitimize experts’ policy prescriptions and a fundamental change in the con-
stellation of stakeholders allow new incumbents to push aside existing experts.
Experts fall from power under such negative conditions, and they are typically
not replaced by actors with similar expertise or autonomy. Policy areas become
more politically dependent.


Conclusion
The theory developed in this chapter seeks to explain experts’ autonomy and
power in democratic Latin America. The theory specifies the causes of techni-
cal autonomy as well as its variation across policy sectors and over time in the
same policy sector. I discuss how expertise is the source of experts’ autonomy
and explain why this expertise is a valuable resource in two basic ways. First,
asymmetries of knowledge and theoretical understanding make politicians
highly dependent on experts’ technical abilities. Second, higher levels of exper-
tise also allow technocrats to act strategically in order to advance their policy
interests and increase their autonomy.
   Then, using four factors, I explain the variation in the strength of techni-
cal autonomy across policy sectors and within the same policy sector across
time. Fundamental for technical autonomy and continuity, the first two relate
to the politics of policy: the political cost to the incumbent of poor policy per-
formance and a balanced, plural constellation of stakeholders with interests
in a policy sector. The other two factors, related to the technical aspects of
policy – the level of technical complexity and the degree of policy consensus
among experts – when present, also contribute to technical autonomy. Finally, I
explain how these factors account for technical entrenchment and technocratic
demise.
   The following chapters provide the empirical basis for these conclusions.
Chapters 4 (Colombia) and 5 (Peru) show that economic policy is, in general, a
more likely sector for the emergence and persistence of technocratic autonomy
because of the presence of the aforementioned factors. In two of the episodes
(Colombia 1958–2013) and Peru (1990–2013), economic experts enjoyed con-
siderable autonomy and achieved long-lasting continuity. Nonetheless, these
favorable conditions are not always present in economic policy. Politicians’
lack of awareness of the cost of irresponsible economic policy, an unbalanced
constellation of stakeholders, and a lack of expert consensus explain why
Peruvian economic experts were dismissed from their posts during the early
1980s when they faced strong political and business opposition.
   The three health policy episodes discussed in Chapters 6 (Colombia) and 7
(Peru) confirm that expertise is technocrats’ most valuable resource for gain-
ing and maintaining autonomy. The episodes also confirm that health experts’
autonomy is lower and more vulnerable than is the autonomy achieved by eco-
nomic experts. In two of the three episodes (Peru 1990–2002 and Colombia
64                              Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

1966–1970) politicians eventually dismissed experts, whereas in the Peruvian
episode conditions were more favorable for the emergence and continuity
of technocrats’ autonomy. Variation in three of the aforementioned factors
explains the more positive trajectory of health policy experts during the second
Colombian episode (1993–2013). In this episode, by creating a single health
care system, which included the formally employed and the poor, the reform
enhanced the political cost of poor health policy performance. Also, the constel-
lation of stakeholders in health policy became more plural and balanced, partly
due to expert-driven policy reforms. Colombian experts were more successful
at limiting the intrusion of other actors in health policy and have remained
influential actors in Colombia, although their autonomy remains more vulner-
able than in the economic cases. Finally, the health economics approach made
health policy more complex, thus making it easier for experts to exclude other
actors from policy making.
4

Economic Technocrats in Colombia (1958–2013)




There currently exists a nucleus of young Colombians dedicated to their country’s
­development above and beyond partisan considerations, often accepting positions
 with the government and sacrificing more lucrative opportunities in private employ-
 ment. They are engineers, economists, agronomists, the new technocrats. (Robert Dix,
 1967, 199)

Under the National Front pact (1958–1974), particularly during the presidency
of Carlos Lleras Restrepo (1966–1970), economic technocrats in Colombia
established themselves as the architects of their nation’s economic policy. Since
then, the Ministry of Finance (MF), the National Planning Department (NPD),
and the Central Bank (Banco de la República) have become widely recognized
for the technical excellence of their cadres. Colombian politicians also became
informally constrained to appoint only highly qualified individuals selected
from a small group of candidates to top positions in these institutions. Diverse
scholars highlight the continuity and influence of this economic technocracy
as a distinguishing feature of Colombian politics (Urrutia 1991; Hershberg
2006, 5; Thorp 1991; Thorp and Durand 1997; Edwards and Steiner 2008, 67;
Mares 1993; Meisel Roca 1997; Juárez 1993a; 1993b; Leal Buitrago 1990, 35;
Berry and Solaun 1980, 447–448).
   In clear contrast to Colombia’s Andean neighbors, technical cadres have
consistently held economic positions for more than fifty years. The practice of
appointing technocrats has persisted through varied political and economic
conditions, including some hypothesized to be unfavorable to technocratic con-
tinuity. Experts were picked to head ministries under technically inclined presi-
dents, such as Virgilio Barco (1986–1990), César Gaviria (1990–1994), and
Juan Manuel Santos (2010–), but also under more “political” leaders such as
César Turbay Ayala (1978–1982), Belisario Betancur (1982–1986), and Álvaro
Uribe (2002–2010). Experts remained influential during periods of bipartisan
rule from 1958 to 2002 but also under a hegemonic President, Álvaro Uribe in

                                                                                  65
66                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

the 2000s. Furthermore, this autonomy remained high under good economic
conditions in the early 1970s, the early 1990s, and late 2000s as well as during
international economic crises in the 1960s, late 1970s, early 1980s, and late
1990s.
    How did experts achieve autonomy and continuity in economic policy areas
of the Colombian state? Why did economic technocrats in Colombia success-
fully entrench their expertise decades before those in other Latin American
countries? What explains experts’ domination of economic agencies while
technocrats in other policy areas of the Colombian state remained weak and
vulnerable to political interference? In what follows, I show how experts’ delib-
erate actions to institutionalize technocratic control, and particularly, how the
high scores in the four factors put forth in my theory explain economic experts’
autonomy and entrenchment in the MF and NPD.
    The chapter proceeds as follows. In the first section, I discuss the political
and economic context in which autonomous experts rose to prominence in the
Colombian state during the National Front (NF) and sketch the biographies of
several top economic officials during the last decades in order to show techni-
cal continuity. In the following section I present evidence of experts’ autonomy,
highlighting how experts’ preferences are frequently at odds with those of poli-
ticians and those of the private sector, the actors with the strongest interest in
economic policy making. With this picture of continuity and autonomy clear,
in the third section I show that economic experts deliberately pursued strat-
egies that helped entrench their technical autonomy. Specifically, Colombian
technocrats built their power through a gradual process of careful institution
building. In this final section, I detail how the four factors highlighted by my
theory explain this long-lasting autonomy of the Colombian technocracy.


Technocratic Emergence and Continuity
The emergence of an economic technocracy in Colombia can be traced to
domestic and international conditions during the NF period when the liberal
and conservative parties agreed to share power. The NF pact developed out of
the two parties’ mutual interest in ending the dictatorship of General Gustavo
Rojas Pinilla (1953–1957), stopping the fierce partisan violence wracking the
country, and fostering economic development. According to the agreement, the
parties would alternate in power for a period of sixteen years (1958–1974),
or four presidential terms, supporting the NF’s presidential candidate in each
election. To guarantee parity, all governmental positions (seats in Congress,
governorships, ministries, and local authorities) were divided equally, and a con-
stitutional provision stipulated a two-thirds majority in Congress for approv-
ing laws. Electoral competition against the Front’s candidates was legal, but
challengers had to run under liberal or conservative banners even if they lacked
the official support of the parties. The pact, strongly supported by Colombian
elites and approved in a referendum by 90 percent of the population, became
Economic Technocrats in Colombia                                                  67

part of the Colombian Constitution (Dix 1967; Payne 1968; Hartlyn 1988;
Gutiérrez Sanín 2007).
     To achieve its goals, the NF aimed to professionalize the politicized
­bureaucracy and rationalize budget allocations. Both parties recognized that
 patronage politics caused drastic changes in personnel every time power shifted
 between parties, leading to gross inefficiencies and partisan conflict (Payne
 1968; Schmidt 1974; Gutiérrez Sanín 2007, ch. 2; Leal Buitrago and Dávila
 1990; Dávila and Delgado 2002). The Pact of Sitges (July 1957), the “peace
 treaty” between the parties that served as the basis for the NF, proposed that
 administrative positions be filled by meritocratic appointment, with bureau-
 crats prohibited from intervening in political controversies, and sanctions for
 those who abused public office (Schmidt 1974, 431–436).
     In an effort to fulfill these promises, liberal Alberto Lleras Camargo, the
 first NF president (1958–1962), undertook ambitious reforms. These changes
 included the creation of a newmerit-based civil service, institutions to enforce the
 neutrality of public employees, reforms in various state sectors, and a national
 school for high-level bureaucrats, the Escuela Nacional de Administración,
 modeled on the French École Nationale Administratif (interviews with Vidal
 Perdomo 2006 and J. Cárdenas 2008). Part of this reform effort focused on
 economic institutions. For the Front’s development strategy to work, it was
 crucial to strengthen economic institutions, depoliticize budget expenditures,
 and professionalize policy making by appointing technocrats (Mares 1993;
 Juárez 1993a; 1993b).
     The existing institutional configuration of economic policy making in
 Colombia limited the government’s ability to manage the economy and respond
 to external crises. Among other problems, a strongly partisan Congress retained
 considerable control over the budget (Juárez 1993a, 76–78; Mares 1993, 462–
 463). Congressmen used these powers to restrain the executive’s policies or
 provide their constituencies particularistic benefits like higher wages for work-
 ers or tax benefits for special interest groups (Mares 1993, 463–464; inter-
 view with Urrutia 2008). Additionally, the Central Bank board of directors,
 which set monetary policy, consisted of bankers and not state officials (Mares
 1993, 460).
     These economic reforms account for economic experts’ entry into govern-
 ment. In an effort to control and rationalize public expenditures, President
 Lleras Camargo increased the power and technical capacity of the National
 Planning Office (later called National Planning Department, or NPD) (Caballero
 Argáez 2008; Urrutia 2008; Juárez 1995,103–113). Formally dependent on the
 presidency, the NPD, together with the MF, was given responsibility for the
 budgetary process. Two economists with postgraduate degrees from Harvard,
 Oxford, and the London School of Economics were appointed as NPD direc-
 tors during Lleras’s term. Another reform was the creation of a special council,
 the Consejo Nacional de Política Económica y Planeación, to coordinate devel-
 opment investment. Initially composed of two executive ministers and two
68                                      Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

members of Congress, the council later grew to include two technical advisers
(Mares 1993; Juárez 1993a; 1993b).
   In addition to the domestic reform push, international linkages and leverage
also prompted politicians to appoint technocrats to state positions. Linkages
with IFIs and foreign aid agencies led to efforts at technical rationalization of
the budget allocation process.1 Additionally, the Alliance for Progress, a U.S.-
sponsored program to support democratic countries in Latin America, offered
considerable funds to states joining the program if they presented a develop-
ment plan. The NPD designed a ten-year plan to fulfill this requirement and
obtain these funds (Botero 2005, 19).
   More important than these linkages, external leverage increased the execu-
tives branch’s need for economic expertise. Balance-of-payments crises in
1957, 1961, 1963, and 1965 forced the government to negotiate with the IMF
in order to obtain new loans to balance the budget (Berry 1980, 289). Both
Alberto Lleras and the NF’s second president, Guillermo León Valencia (1962–
1966), relied on economists with the necessary skills to negotiate with IFIs. The
IMF demanded substantial devaluations to solve the crises, which in 1957 and
1962 threatened political stability. Pressure from IFIs caused the government
to seek technical counter-proposals that only highly trained economic experts
could prepare (Grindle and Thomas 1991, 5; Mares 1993; Botero 2005; inter-
view with Botero 2009). Although these economic crises were by no means
comparable to the hyperinflationary disasters of the eighties in Latin America,
they did contribute to the recruitment of experts.
   As a result, economic technocrats in the executive branch gained more ­control
over economic policy during the NF. These changes happened incrementally,
frequently by using, and abusing, the president’s power to declare states of
siege and emergency. Because of the 1962 crisis, for example, President Valencia
reformed the planning council and changed its name to the Consejo Nacional
de Política Económica y Social, or CONPES. The reform effectively excluded
members of Congress from holding positions in this institution. Valencia also
convinced Congress to create a Monetary Board composed only of members of
the executive branch. In a pattern that became increasingly common, this new
board also included two technical advisers (Mares 1993, 463).2
   As discussed in detail later, these newly appointed experts not only helped the
executive branch to achieve more control over the economy but also brought
into the state a whole new set of ideas and an agenda that transcended immedi-
ate executive interests. Experts maneuvered to entrench their autonomy, orient


1
    The demand for a professional planning office was not new: as early as 1949, the World Bank’s
    first international mission was sent to Colombia and recommended such a reform (Sandilands
    1990).
2
    Law 21 of 1963. The Board consisted of the ministers of Finance, Development, Agriculture, the
    head of the Planning Department, the manager of the Bank of the Republic, and two permanent
    technical experts.
Economic Technocrats in Colombia                                                               69

the country’s development model outward, and diversify the economy through
the promotion of nontraditional exports (Juárez 1993a, 467–468; 1993b, 25).3
These reforms included the creation of an insulated technocratic institution,
ProExpo, charged with financing and promoting these exports (Díaz-Alejandro
1973). To prevent its politicization, the institution’s governing board was com-
posed of business representatives and technical experts.
    These technocratic trends became even more pronounced under President
Carlos Lleras Restrepo (1966–1970), who further strengthened the NPD and
other economic institutions. The NPD was tasked with authorizing public
investment, administering external loans, and designing a national develop-
ment plan at the outset of each administration. Additionally, Lleras reinforced
CONPES to centralize development and economic policy decision mak-
ing (Thorp 1991, 150). The NPD’s director became the general secretary of
CONPES, a move that considerably increased the NPD’s control over public
investment (Grindle and Thomas 1991, 83–87). In 1969, Lleras and his team
also achieved a constitutional reform that further reduced Congress’s role in
economic policy making.4
    Lleras surrounded himself with what is now identified as the first genera-
tion of Colombian technocrats: Economic Secretary of the Presidency Rodrigo
Botero; Director of the NPD Édgar Gutiérrez; and Monetary Board advisers
Hernando Gómez (1964–1968), Jorge Ruíz Lara (1965–1969), and Miguel
Urrutia (1968–1970). Also under this administration, the technocracy took its
first steps toward self-perpetuation as other young officials, such as Roberto
Junguito, Guillermo Perry, and Carlos Caballero Argáez,5 who are all now
senior members of the Colombian technocracy, came to occupy leading posi-
tions in the NPD.
    A particular event during these years constitutes a defining moment for the
consolidation of economic expertise. In 1967, low international coffee prices
caused another balance-of-payment crisis that led to a breakdown in nego-
tiations between the government and the IMF. The Colombian government
rejected the Fund’s demands for a substantial devaluation (Juárez 1993b, 24;
Díaz-Alejandro 1977, 184–206). In a televised speech, Lleras explained to
Colombians that the “unfortunate differences” with the IMF were based on the
institution’s “anti-technical” demands (Thorp 1991, 148). The alternative was
a solution proposed by Lleras’s own experts: a “crawling peg” exchange rate
that involved gradual devaluations. This move further increased the political
importance of technocrats. Experts often remember it as the decisive moment



3
    Decree Law 444, March 1967.
4
    However, the reform was costly for the president. In exchange, congressmen received discretion-
    ary expenditure funds (“auxilios parlamentarios”).
5
    For a report on the different generations of Colombian technocrats see Cambio, “Los Nuevos
    Gurús de la Economía,” N. 816, February 2009.
70                                       Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

table 4.1. Colombian Economic Officials (1958–2013)

Ministers     Individuals Economists Graduate PhD Previous                Worked for  Member
of Finance    (1)         (BA or MA) Studies in   State                   Business    of Political
                                     the US or    Position in             Before or   Party (2)
                                     Europe       MF, NPD,                After
                                                  or Central              Appointment
                                                  Bank

1958–1974         12             4          5           1         2             3               7
1974–1990         10             7          5           1         4             5               2
1990–2013         11            11         11           6         9             7               4

Directors of NPD
1958–1974        10              7          7           1        5              3               3
1974–1990         9              6          8           1        8              5               1
1990–2013        13             11         12           7       11              7               1

Sources: M. Palacios 2001 and Meisel Roca 1997 and archival research.
1. Four individuals, José Antonio Ocampo, Eduardo Wiesner, Juan Carlos Echeverry, and Mauricio
    Cárdenas both held the position of Minister of Finance and Director of NPD. Roberto Junguito
    was Minister of Finance on two occasions (1983–1984; 2002–2004).
2. Formally, from 1958 to 1998 almost all individuals were sympathizers of one of the two tra-
    ditional political parties. I count as politicians only those individuals who were party leaders or
    held elected positions at any level (local, congressional, or executive).



in which domestic experts could negotiate on equal terms with IFIs (interview
with Botero 2009).
   After Lleras’s administration, a conflict emerged between experts in the
NPD and the last of the NF governments under Conservative President Misael
Pastrana. This conflict, discussed in more detail later, led to the resignation
of several of Lleras’s remaining technical appointees in the NPD. However,
Pastrana did not reduce the technical qualifications of appointees to the NPD;
a change in this technical team did not produce politicization in the NPD.
This incident exemplifies how, even at such an early stage, incumbents were
already informally constrained to appoint experts within economic institu-
tions. By the end of the NF, liberal Alfonso López Michelsen (1974–1978)
reappointed several members of Lleras’s economic team to positions within
economic institutions.
   Since then, president after president has followed the precedent of mak-
ing technical appointments to Colombia’s economic institutions. The academic
and professional credentials of top economic officials in the last five decades
attest to this technocratic continuity. As Table 4.1 shows, the level of technical
expertise within the government has increased consistently through time.
   Economic advisers to the Monetary Board also possess this high level of exper-
tise. I focus on these particular officials only until 1991, when constitutional
reforms granted the Banco de la República institutional autonomy through
the creation of an independent board of directors. As shown in Table 4.2, the
Economic Technocrats in Colombia                                                       71

table 4.2. Economic Advisers to the Monetary Board (1958–1991)

Economic             Individuals    Economists Graduate       PhD         Previous State
Advisers to the                     (BA or MA) Studies in the             Position in MF,
Monetary Board                                 US or                      NPD, or Central
                                               Europe                     Bank
1962–1991                  17              12             10          7         15
Sources: M. Palacios 2001, Meisel Roca 1997, and archival research.


board appointments have also been overwhelmingly ­technocratic, including
several past NPD directors and ministers of finance (M. Palacios 2001).
   Colombian technocrats have created their own recruitment process and
informal career track. Commonly, they begin as economics students at the
Universidad de Los Andes. Since 1970, thirteen of twenty-four NPD directors
and eleven of twenty finance ministers held BAs in economics from Los Andes.
In the 2000s, six of seven NPD directors and four of six finance ministers were
undergraduates at this university. These young economists then have intern-
ships with state economic institutions or economic research centers such as the
think tank FEDESARROLLO. Next, they hold intermediate positions in state
economic institutions. Scholarships from these institutions allow these experts
to obtain further specialized training at first-class foreign universities and then
return to Colombia to assume higher state positions. Current Ministers Juan
Carlos Echeverry (Minister of Finance) and Mauricio Santa María (Minister
of Health) followed this career path. The stability of Colombian experts in
economic institutions over the course of time is not in question. But is this con-
tinuity and informal career path a sign of autonomy? I explore this question in
the next section,


Technical Autonomy in Colombia
Evidence of technical autonomy is that technocrats’ preferences are distin-
guishable from – and often at odds with –those of politicians and economic
actors in Colombia. To demonstrate this autonomy, I examine the argument
that experts’ stability and power in Colombia result from either patronage-
based politicians or business actors and show how it does not, however, reflect
the empirical evidence. In the process, I show how experts’ preferences are
often not aligned with those of these powerful actors.
   Miguel Urrutia proposes that technocratic influence over Colombian eco-
nomic policy depends on politicians’ need to maintain patronage-based
resources (Urrutia 1991). A characteristic of the Colombian political sys-
tem, before and after the NF, is political parties’ extensive use of patronage-
based (Gutiérrez Sanín 2007; Hartlyn 1988; Wilde 1978). Urrutia argues
that the absence of economic populism in Colombia is due to politicians’
72                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

awareness that macroeconomic stability is necessary in order to maintain their
patronage-based machines. Thus, “rational” politicians during the National
Front chose to leave economic policy to experts. Although Urrutia acknowl-
edges that technocrats are important actors in Colombia, his main factor
explaining independent economic policy is the parties’ decision not to interfere
in the economy. The rejection of populist policies is paradoxically based in poli-
ticians’ desire to protect a higher political interest: patronage-based resources.
    Urrutia is correct to highlight that powerful, patronage-based political par-
ties have restrained their intervention into economic policy and lived side by
side with experts. However, in contrast to Urrutia, I argue that technocratic
policy making is more a cause than a consequence of politicians’ restrained
intervention into economic policy. Two reasons make me reject the view that
technocrats are ultimately dependent on politicians.
    First, the argument that political moderation protects clientelistic resources
is exaggerated. On the contrary, experts limit political control over clientelis-
tic resources. Budgets and national development plans are first designed in
the MF and NPD and then debated in Congress, which negotiates earmarks
without making broad changes that affect fundamental macroeconomic lines.
This planning process restrains politicians’ access to patronage spending. As a
result, the budget deficit remains under control despite frequent demands for
additional spending. Even without formal protections to guarantee their inde-
pendence, the NPD and the MF have counterbalanced strong clientelistic forces
in Colombia that, if allowed to, would increase government expenditures.
    My interviews with experts and politicians clearly document that these
actors are often at odds. Economic experts are perceived as constantly limit-
ing political expenditures, as confirmed by ex-finance ministers like Hommes
and Junguito, and ex-director of the NPD and now Minister of Finance
Echeverry. All these individuals consider negotiating skills to be crucial assets
for Colombian finance ministers, whose jobs involve spending considerable
time meeting with politicians to deal with their particularistic demands (inter-
views with Echeverry 2008, Hommes 2008, Junguito 2008, and Botero 2009).
Experts keep Congress in check, opposing policies with potentially negative eco-
nomic effects, and advancing technical policies through careful negotiation.
    Political actors also share this view of opposing and counterbalancing forces.
According to Senator Victor Renán Barco, one of the most powerful electoral
barons in Colombian history and president of the Senate’s budget commission
for two decades, the relation between traditional politicians and technocrats
is one of “tense cordiality.” Experts and politicians see one another as limiting
their preferences: experts are frustrated at not being able to drastically reduce
clientelism, while politicians feel limited by experts’ control over resources
(interview with Barco 2006).
    Additionally, Urrutia’s theory assigns too much rationality to politicians.
With few exceptions, politicians lack the technical skills that experts have.
Politicians understand the political costs of economic crises but are less aware
Economic Technocrats in Colombia                                                   73

of the long-term consequences of particular policies or aggregate costs of
­budget expenditures, especially if the decisions are highly technical. Politicians
 constantly negotiate their demands with the finance minister and the Dirección
 de Crédito Público (Directorate of Public Credit), the MF office responsible for
 executing the budget. According to its current director, these negotiations are
 never ending, with politicians seeking to direct more funds toward their con-
 stituents and the ministry frequently blocking their demands (interview with
 Janna 2013). Crediting politicians with sufficient knowledge to make a tacit
 pact to not interfere in macroeconomic policy and restrain their budget appe-
 tite for clientelistic resources overstates politicians’ foresight and understates
 experts’ leverage.
     The image of competing forces, with experts checking politicians who are
 demanding more resources, is closer to reality than Urrutia’s rational theory.
 It is true that empowered technocrats and strong clientelistic political parties
 have coexisted for more than fifty years. Even though traditional parties have
 recently lost their dominance over politics without new national parties emerg-
 ing, clientelistic regional and local politicians still remain highly influential. So
 this balance of power between politicians and economic experts persists.
     Furthermore, an alternative view that presents experts as the agents of a
 president interested in restraining the clientelistic appetite of Congress would
 also not be accurate. As discussed in the following section, presidents certainly
 find experts to be useful officials that help to both keep Congress in check and
 advance reform goals. But technocratic economic policies also restrain incum-
 bents; there are tangible limits constraining presidents’ management of the
 economy. Experts are often the ones drawing the lines, sometimes even clash-
 ing with politicians’ preferences. Turbay, Betancourt, and Uribe all disagreed
 with expert policies but nonetheless kept the economy under tight technical
 control. More broadly, some of the experts’ development plans, such as moving
 toward a more open economic model with fewer industrial subsidies, were not
 part of the agenda of politicians such as Turbay or Betancourt. Reforms and
 changes adopted to achieve this goal were designed and gradually implemented
 through technical reforms. At times, incumbents’ and technocrats’ preferences
 coincided, as in the cases of Presidents Barco and Gaviria during the market
 reforms of the late eighties and early nineties. In other cases, however, experts
 pushed for reforms that transcended politicians’ goals.
     A second set of arguments to explain technical continuity in Colombia sees
 business actors as the real power behind experts. These arguments focus on
 structural forces and the influence of the private sector as crucial to experts’
 status. Estrada, for example, argues that the Colombian technocracy is closely
 related to dominant economic interests. During the aftermath of the NF,
 experts achieved a certain level of autonomy from local interests, but mostly
 for structural reasons (Estrada Álvarez 2005). This “relative” autonomy was
 based on the balanced conflict between industrial and export interests, which
 provided experts with enough room to gain some independence. This period
74                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

was short-lived, however, as transnational interests and their domestic allies
became dominant in the eighties. Since then, experts have become neoliberal
in their approach. Similarly, Ahumada (1996) attributes market reforms con-
ducted in the nineties in Colombia to the dominant position of transnational
economic elites and their local allies.
   Business interests are certainly important in Colombia and, as I argue later,
have contributed to technical autonomy. Colombia boasts several business
groups and well-organized private sector associations that constantly pro-
vide opinions about economic policy and thereby limit how much politicians
can intervene in this policy arena. Economic policy consultation between the
state and business associations is common. These associations enjoy substan-
tial access to state officials, partly because of the revolving door between eco-
nomic agencies and the business community (interviews with Echeverry 2008,
Junguito 2008 and Montenegro 2008).
   Nonetheless, these theories greatly exaggerate the power of economic forces
over technical cadres. Technocrats are sufficiently distant from these actors to
be considered as autonomous from them. To begin with, experts often hold
different policy preferences than those of economic forces, which occasionally
resulted in conflicts with certain powerful interests. In Colombia, experts faced
coffee and industrial interests who sought to influence macroeconomic policy
and block experts’ attempts to tax their businesses (interview with Perry 2008).
Before experts entered government during the NF, Colombia had pursued an
import substitution industrialization (ISI) model that conceded extensive pro-
tective tariffs to industrialists. Additionally, coffee exporters received special
benefits, such as a separate interest rate from that adopted by the Banco de
la República (Juárez 1993a; 1993b; Mares 1993). Yet, as technocrats gained
control over economic policy making, the development model became consid-
erably more outward-oriented (Berry 1977, Juárez 1993b, 26; Mares 1993).
   Additional evidence of technical autonomy is that even if there are close ties
with business sectors, experts manage information selectively, choosing to not
share some of it with business actors. This strategic behavior was evident in the
response to the economic crisis in the early eighties (Thorp and Durand 1997,
223). The economic team led by Minister Roberto Junguito (1983–1984) was
forced to significantly devalue the currency and then try to prevent inflation.
The team achieved these goals through a reform plan that was kept secret from
businesses and politicians outside the executive branch (Thorp 1991, 185–190;
interview with Junguito 2008). Secrecy was necessary because these actions had
negative short-term consequences for businesses. Had they known the plan, the
private sector’s reaction would have rendered the reforms ineffective. That the
plans remained secret demonstrates that state experts were not subordinate to
private sector interests.
   More generally, a crucial problem with these theories is that the supposedly
inevitable causal relationship of economic forces determining public ­policy does
not hold in Colombia. The opposite is sometimes true: state policies, designed
Economic Technocrats in Colombia                                                             75

and implemented by experts, can modify the country’s economic structure. As
mentioned, since entering government, Colombian experts have usually sup-
ported export-oriented policies that slowly pushed the economy toward greater
openness and less dependence on coffee exports. During the NF, these prefer-
ences led técnicos to clash with entrenched industrial and coffee interests. The
incentives that experts introduced for nontraditional exports helped these new
sectors gain considerably greater weight in the economy. After 1967, nontradi-
tional exports grew impressively from 15 percent of exports in 1962 to 46 per-
cent in 1972 (Botero 2005; Juárez 1993b, 27–28). Coffee gradually lost its
predominance, falling from 67.8 percent of exports in 1963 to 52.2 percent in
1967 and a mere 20.9 percent in 1990. Thus, despite the lack of support from
coffee and industrial interests for these policies (Juárez 1993a; 1993b; Mares
1993; Urrutia 1983, 42–43), experts induced significant structural changes in
the Colombian economy.
   Similarly, market reforms in the late eighties and especially in the early
nineties were driven by experts who faced ambivalence and sometimes out-
right opposition from business associations and politicians. Reforms started
at the end of President Virgilio Barco’s administration (1986–1990) (Juárez
1993b; Juárez 1995, 156). Barco’s economic team designed a market reform
plan largely in secret. The government unveiled this plan by suddenly reduc-
ing 861 protective tariffs, a measure criticized by business leaders for lack of
prior consultation.6 Only afterward did economic officials meet with business
associations to explain why the reforms were a necessity.
   Market reform greatly accelerated and deepened during the government of
César Gaviria (1990–1994) who, having served as Minister of Finance him-
self, shared policy preferences with economic experts. Under Minister Rudolf
Hommes, public enterprises were privatized and the country opened to interna-
tional trade (Edwards and Steiner 2008; Juárez 1995, 156–170). The govern-
ment eliminated import licenses for all goods except some agricultural products
and reduced tariffs from an average of 44.6 percent in 1989 to 9 percent in
1994 (Reina and Zuluaga 2006, 138; interview with Reina 2008). While some
economic associations favored the reforms or accepted them as a necessity, oth-
ers opposed these changes. However in general, business associations adopted
a wait-and-see attitude (Cepeda Ulloa 1994; Juárez 1995; interview with
Rettberg 2009).7 These expert-designed reforms further altered the structure of

6
    El Tiempo, “La apertura económica: a mitad de camino,” December 30th, 1990.
7
    El Tiempo, “Apoyo del nuevo gobierno reclaman gremios nariñenses,” August 2nd, 1990; El
    Tiempo: “Gremios del agro arremeten contra la apertura,” September 6th, 1990; El Tiempo,
    “Agro: apertura con protección,” September 20th, 1990; “Creada comisión rural para defender
    intereses del campo,” September 21st, 1990; “Contraescape,” October 4th, 1990 (about criti-
    cisms of the reforms from small industrialists and commerce); “Pese a las dificultades, para
    los empresarios es irreversible la apertura: ya no se puede devolver,” October 14th, 1990;
    “Agricultores y apertura,” November 6th, 1990; “Apertura: los pies sobre la tierra,” December
    15th, 1990.
76                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

business interests (interviews with Junguito 2008 and Urrutia 2008). Theories
about external pressures from IFIs can also be discarded because IFIs lacked
the leverage to press for market reforms in a country with a stable economy.
    As pointed out by Rudolf Hommes, the minister of finance who pushed
these reforms forward during the Gaviria administration, Colombian experts
were able to implement market reforms before economic conditions worsened,
in clear contrast to other countries in the region (Cepeda Ulloa 1994; Edwards
and Steiner 2008; interview with Hommes 2008). Experts shared the opinion
that an early reform was preferable to waiting for economic conditions to
deteriorate. That is, market reforms were part of a preemptive movement to
make the economy more competitive and in line with experts’ prescriptions;
they were not the result of business pressures, political urgency, or external
demands. Thus, contrary to economic-structuralist arguments, the direction of
causality runs from experts to business rather than the other way around.
    Moreover, in contrast to the structural and political interpretations of tech-
nocratic power, experts in Colombia have sought to insulate economic pol-
icy making from business and political interests. As mentioned, in the sixties
technocrats successfully created a monetary board composed only of members
of the executive branch, reducing private and congressional influence (Juárez
1993b, 23). Later, in the eighties, technocrats sought to further insulate the
monetary board as well as reduce its power to provide special benefits to busi-
ness interests and political elites (Botero 2005, 23). The 1991 Constitution
gave this responsibility to an independent board in the Central Bank, as numer-
ous economic experts had proposed (De Brigard 1995; Hommes 1988). The
reform was designed by technical officials from the Central Bank and sup-
ported by Finance Minister Rudolf Hommes (Hommes 1995).
    In sum, economic experts in Colombia cannot be considered either the prod-
uct of enlightened politicians’ choices or mere agents of the private sector. On
the contrary, the evidence presented shows how economic experts have acted
with significant autonomy in Colombian politics during the past fifty years.
Experts have preferences and agendas that are not subordinate to those of
other actors. Some academics and politicians suggest that bipartisan rule and
the reformist intention of presidents during the NF is fundamental to explain-
ing this technical independence in economic policy (Kline 1983, 105–107;
interviews with Morales Benites 2008 and Llorente 2006). Although some of
these actors were important reformists, these arguments forget that several of
the NF’s bipartisan reforms were never implemented or fell short of their goals.
Large parts of the public bureaucracy remained unprofessional, and clien-
telism increased during these years (Leal Buitrago and Dávila 1990; Gutiérrez
Sanín and Dávila 2000; Gutiérrez Sanín 2007, 146–147; Wilde 1978). Social
reforms did not advance significantly (Hartlyn 1988, 112–118) nor did the
National School of Management gain a reputation for providing high quality
education (interview with J. Cárdenas 2008). Agronomists and health experts
failed to achieve a similar entrenchment after the NF (interviews with Junguito
Economic Technocrats in Colombia                                               77

2008 and Ordóñez 2006). In contrast to their initial promise to modernize the
Colombian state, the traditional parties learned how to share the spoils in most
policy areas. What explains the exception of the economic technocracy?


Explaining Technocratic Autonomy in Colombia
My explanation of this exception is based on both technocrats’ actions and,
more fundamentally, the conditions surrounding economic policy in Colombia.
On the one hand, experts purposefully maneuvered to enhance and entrench
expertise in economic policy areas. At the same time, as discussed next, they
benefited from high scores on the four factors – both pairs of politics of pol-
icy and technical aspects of policy factors – identified by my theory, which
made economic policy a more likely area for technical autonomy to emerge
and entrench.


Crafting Technocratic Autonomy in Colombia
As discussed, domestic and international factors contributed to the appoint-
ment of experts in Colombia. Once experts were in their posts, politicians
gradually grew more dependent on technocrats in the Ministry of Finance,
the NPD, and the Banco de la República. Technocrats boosted their relevance
to politicians by providing contacts from IFIs, taking control of international
negotiations, overseeing ongoing reforms, and designing development plans for
new administrations (interview with Caballero Argáez 2007). Simply by occu-
pying their positions and fulfilling their responsibilities, experts made politi-
cians more reliant on technical advice.
   However, experts also understood that profound changes were necessary in
order to keep economic policy under their prudent technical management. The
crisis conditions that led to experts’ appointment were not dramatic enough
to induce politicians to give them full control over policy. As a result, experts’
efforts to craft lasting autonomy and guarantee technical policy in the long run
became significant causes behind this outcome. In Colombia, experts deliber-
ately used expertise as a political tool to achieve continuity. Rodrigo Botero,
one of the first economic technocrats, calls the gradual entrenchment of tech-
nical expertise in the Colombian state a process of “intelligent design” (Botero
2005; 1995).
   I identify two strategies through which Colombian experts established and
maintained their autonomy in economic policy. First, técnicos made technical
knowledge a requirement to participate in economic policy making in order
to exclude less qualified individuals. Second, regarding institution building,
experts adopted formal and informal rules to guarantee meritocratic technical
recruitment in economic policy areas. Furthermore, they took steps to increase
the size and influence of the epistemic community of economists within the
state and Colombian society.
78                              Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

   First, expertise proved a highly valuable resource for marginalizing other
actors who previously exercised considerable influence over economic pol-
icy. Technocrats changed the terms upon which economic policy was debated
and adopted in Colombia (interviews with Botero 2009 and Urrutia 2008).
These experts were aware that their superior knowledge gave them an advan-
tage that they actively exploited. Experts demanded that anyone questioning
their proposals had to do so with mathematical or statistical arguments. The
low level of technical skill found among Colombian politicians in those years
made this strategy effective; economic expertise was particularly powerful
because experts’ opponents lacked it almost completely. Previous economic
policymakers, usually lawyers linked to political parties and business groups,
did not have similar technical abilities, which allowed experts to easily dis-
miss their arguments. During discussion of technical complexity details, this
asymmetry proved crucial for excluding these actors and entrenching technical
autonomy.
   A second strategy experts used to entrench their autonomy was adopting
institutions to guarantee the continued appointment of técnicos in economic
policy areas and prevent politicization. Members of the economic team sought
to institutionalize the NPD by developing informal networks with other experts
in the bureaucracy, establishing linkages with political and economic elites,
and reinforcing an internal meritocratic culture (Juárez 1995, 107; Grindle
and Thomas 1991, 84–87). Experts in all other economic institutions followed
similar strategies. To guarantee technical recruitment, the NPD, MF, and the
Banco de la República adopted an informal rule: only officials with postgrad-
uate studies in economics or related technical fields could be appointed to the
higher ranks of these institutions. With very few exceptions, reaching the top
position in the NPD unofficially requires, at a minimum, having engaged in
doctoral-level studies (interview with Urrutia 2008; Urrutia 1991, 385).
   Additionally, to ensure a continuous supply of candidates with adequate
technical credentials and reinforce a meritocratic culture, Colombian economic
institutions offered scholarships to their members to pursue graduate studies
abroad. To receive these scholarships, candidates must have been accepted at a
prestigious foreign university, which reduces the possibility of party-sponsored
candidates. The Banco de la República started these programs in the seven-
ties. The scholarships are actually loans, but they can be “paid” by working
in the Colombian state for a number of years or contributing to academic
research (e.g., publication in a refereed journal eliminates part of the loan).
In 2005, the bank had twenty-one employees with PhDs in economics while
another sixteen were abroad completing their doctoral studies (Botero 2005,
23). Similarly, since the sixties, support from foreign agencies has allowed the
NPD to provide scholarships to its members. In 1986, this institution adopted
a similar program to the one at the Banco de la República, although it focused
on MA degrees (Juárez 1995, 108). Between 1986 and 2008, 215 NPD officials
received scholarships for postgraduate studies abroad (Rentería 2008, 94).
Economic Technocrats in Colombia                                                               79

Although many individuals who work for economic agencies could receive
higher salaries in the private sector, these academic incentives and the prestige of
working in highly reputable institutions has made these agencies attractive for
qualified candidates (interviews with M. Cárdenas 2008, Echeverry 2008 and
Santa María 2008).8
    The first economic experts not only raised the technical sophistication of
economic policy, but also sought to increase the broader legitimacy of their
technical approach. They did so by supporting civil society institutions and
promoting the study of economics. Colombia now has a strong “epistemic
community” in economics with several journals and newspapers devoted to
economic analysis. Technocrats write op-eds and actively participate in pub-
lic debates. This community constitutes an important support group for
Colombian experts and acts as a watchdog that limits political interference
in economic policy. However, this community has not always possessed the
strength that it does today. In earlier decades, not only did politicians and busi-
ness people lack economic training, but national newspapers did not have eco-
nomic analysts who could explain the costs and benefits of economic decisions
to the general public (Botero 1995). The obvious paucity of economic expertise
in the sixties motivated technocrats to work toward improving it.
    Since the fifties, the Department of Economics at the Universidad de los
Andes, especially its Centro de Estudios sobre Desarrollo Económico (CEDE)
has become a first-class center of economic research and teaching. Thanks to
linkages with international academic institutions that included special summer
courses with world class academics in Bogotá, Los Andes has helped to pro-
vide a constant flow of Colombian students to PhD programs in the United
States. Additionally, since the late sixties, state institutions such as the NPD
and the Banco de la República have become centers of research. They publish
economic journals and books focused on development, economics, and pub-
lic policy, including articles in English to facilitate access to the most current
research.9
    More crucially, in 1970, Rodrigo Botero, with the support of business lead-
ers and foreign agencies, created what became a highly regarded independent
think tank and training center for the Colombian technocracy: Fundación para
la Educación Superior y el Desarrollo (Fedesarrollo) (Botero 1995). Its cre-
ators hoped the center would produce reliable economic information that had
been unavailable in Colombia at the time, conduct nonpartisan public policy
analysis, train new generations of Colombian experts, and alert the public to

8
    According to Echeverry, these informal incentives attract very competitive candidates to the
    NPD. During his term in the NPD, he had eleven PhDs among his staff, even though their salaries
    were under $2,000 (U.S.) per month.
9
    Banco de la República has published Revista del Banco de la República since 1930 and, more
    recently, Ensayos Sobre Política Económica; Planeación y Desarrollo by the NPD has been
    published since 1969; Desarrollo y Sociedad from CEDE started in 1979. Eight universities in
    Colombia publish peer reviewed economic journals.
80                                        Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

challenges facing the economy. Fedesarrollo’s academic output is praised for
its high technical standards and is seen as a model for technical institutions
around the world (Gutiérrez Sanín 1997; Botero 2005; Braun et al. 2007). The
same experts who initially develop proposals within the institution frequently
go on to implement them as state officials.10
    There are many examples of policy proposals that originated in Fedesarrollo.
In the eighties, Fedesarrollo investigated the effect of market liberalization
on Colombia and examined the difficulties of implementing it (Ocampo and
Sarmiento 1987; Lora 1991; Amadeo 1993). In the nineties, the focus turned
to the new institutions adopted in the 1991 Constitution and their problematic
effects on long-term economic stability (Lora and Lanzetta 1995; interview
with Santa María 2008 and Steiner 2009). This research raised concerns in the
following years that led to reforms to rationalize public expenditures (Lora
and Scartascini 2009). Fedesarrollo’s influence on employment policies was
also extensive (Braun et al. 2007, 14–20). Since the late nineties and especially
during the last few years, Fedesarrollo has warned the government about the
increasing costs of the health system for the public budget (Fedesarrollo 2009;
2010; interview with Santa María 2008).
    In conclusion, Colombian economic technocrats acted strategically to
achieve continuity in economic institutions. They have established procedures
that guarantee their reproduction and created institutions outside the state to
support technical economic management. These external institutions provide
more career opportunities for experts, reducing their linkages to and depen-
dence on the business sector which, as shown in the next chapter, is a ­weakness
of Peruvian economic experts. Nonetheless, although important, experts’
strategies are only part of the story. The conditions under which economic
technocrats operated were more favorable than those for experts elsewhere in


10
     The following excerpt from a report about think tanks in Latin America shows this influence:
     “Many [top researchers and directors] have participated in the preparation and execution of
     economic and social policies. For example, many of Fedesarrollo’s former Executive Directors
     have held offices of enormous influence not only in Colombia, but also internationally: Rodrigo
     Botero has been Minister of Finance of Colombia; Roberto Junguito rose on several occasions
     to the State, becoming Minister of Finance and Agriculture and board member of Colombia’s
     Central Bank (Banco de la República); Miguel Urrutia became a Director of National Planning,
     Minister of Energy, and is still involved in policy issues as governor of Banco de la República;
     José Antonio Ocampo has been a former Minister of Finance, Minister of Agriculture, Director
     of National Planning and Executive Director of ECLAC (currently Undersecretary for economic
     Affairs of the United Nations); Guillermo Perry has been a former Minister of Energy, and
     Finance (currently he is the Chief Economist for Latin America and the Caribbean at the World
     Bank); Eduardo Lora became Senior Adviser of the Research Department at the Inter-American
     Development Bank and Juan José Echavarría gained entry in the Banco de la República where
     he became a board member. The actual executive director of Fedesarrollo, Mauricio Cárdenas,
     also held important positions in the Colombian administration where he served in several occa-
     sions as Minister of Economic Development (1994), Minister of Transportation (1998–1999)
     and Director of National Planning (1999–2000)” (Santiso and Whitehead 2006, 22–23).
Economic Technocrats in Colombia                                                81

the Colombian state. High scores in the four factors identified by my theory
explain the success of Colombian technocrats in entrenching their autonomy.


Determinants of Technocratic Autonomy in Colombia
All four factors identified in my theory of technocratic autonomy are present
in the case of Colombian economic experts. The first two politics of policy
factors, politicians’ awareness of the cost of bad economic policy perfor-
mance and a plural and balanced constellation of stakeholders, are central
to explaining technical entrenchment. These two factors, usually high in eco-
nomic ­policy areas, limited political intervention and opened more space for
experts to act autonomously. The latter two factors related to the technical
aspects of policy, technical complexity and expert consensus, facilitated this
process and are especially important in accounting for Colombia’s early tech-
nical entrenchment compared to other Latin American countries. Over time,
technocrats entrenched their power, and influential political and economic
actors came to perceive them as responsible guarantors of stable economic
policy. Incumbents are nowadays required to signal that they are responsible
economic managers by making technical appointments.
    As discussed in the first section, previous balance-of-payments crises meant
Colombian politicians clearly understood the political cost of poor economic
management when experts reached the state. After poor policy outcomes and
violence in the previous decade eroded their legitimacy, party leaders in the
sixties saw proper economic management as necessary to regain some pres-
tige. Incumbent awareness of the political costs of an economic crisis insulated
macroeconomic policy to a considerable degree. Turbulent international eco-
nomic conditions further increased the political danger of irresponsible eco-
nomic policy.
    Certain episodes in particular illustrate how politicians are aware of the
potential costs of economic mismanagement and seek to provide a range of
guarantees that they will not politicize economic decision making. Evidence of
such awareness comes from political campaigns in Colombia where candidates
attempt to signal their commitment to technical continuity. For example, poli-
ticians may announce during campaigns who their economic advisers would
be. Furthermore, incumbents quickly highlight the technical qualifications of
their economic appointees and take great pains to show that they are choosing
officials on technical grounds. Lastly, the recent first presidency of Álvaro Uribe
exemplifies how even popular presidents attempt to gain technical credibility
by respecting experts’ decisions and not attempting to replace them with polit-
ical appointees.
    The election of President César Turbay Ayala in 1978 is one example that
demonstrates politicians’ awareness of the costs of irresponsible economic
policy. Turbay, a long-time liberal regional leader, drew his power within the
party from his regional support and patronage-based machine (Gutiérrez Sanín
82                                      Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

2007, 133). Within the party, he opposed former President Carlos Lleras, who
had strongly supported economic technocrats during his first administration,
for the candidacy of the liberal party. As a result, Turbay’s candidacy was per-
ceived as a threat to technocratic continuity, a view that was furthered by sup-
porters of Turbay who portrayed technocrats as anti-políticos that diminished
politicians’ control over important decisions (Gutiérrez Sanín 2007, ch. 3).
    However, once on the campaign trail, Turbay sought to signal his commit-
ment to fiscal responsibility. In particular, he accused his conservative rival of
promising more than he could deliver and lacking economic realism.11 After
winning the election, he further showed his dedication to prudent economic
management by appointing Eduardo Wiesner, a widely recognized expert who
had served on his predecessors’ economic team, as director of NPD (1978–
1980). Wiesner later became Turbay’s second minister of finance. Turbay’s first
finance minister also had a technocratic background.12
    This case is not exceptional. All presidential candidates in Colombia bow
to the technocracy on the campaign trail as Turbay did. Candidates campaign
with an economic team, thus signaling they are committed to technical conti-
nuity and do not constitute a threat to responsible management. The leader of
this team is usually a member of the Colombian economic technocracy. Former
President Ernesto Samper (1994–1998) stressed that an effective team is cru-
cial for conducting a successful campaign and gaining electoral credibility in
Colombia because these individuals must present the candidate’s plan to the
citizenry, businesses, journalists, and other economic experts (interview with
Samper 2008). Furthermore, the leader of the technical team is often appointed
minister of finance following the election. When finance ministers step down
during a president’s term, the process of choosing their replacements is handled
with similar care.
    The election of Álvaro Uribe (2002–2010) highlights how even popular
incumbents treat economic policy very carefully because of its potential polit-
ical costs. In 2002, Uribe won an impressive 52 percent of the vote and ended
150 years of two-party rule. A liberal leader, Uribe decided to run as an inde-
pendent when the party denied him the candidacy. Like his rivals, Uribe also
appointed a well-reputed economic adviser in order to show his commitment
to technical expertise. Alberto Carrasquilla, a PhD in economics and widely
recognized expert, was Uribe’s main economic adviser during the campaign.
    After his election, Uribe and Carrasquilla met with three prestigious
Colombian technocrats, former Finance Ministers Roberto Junguito, Rudolf
Hommes, and Guillermo Perry, to discuss how to address the country’s grow-
ing economic problems (interview with Perry 2008). Although he considered
picking Carrasquilla, Uribe opted to appoint Junguito, an even more presti-
gious technocrat, as minister of finance to send a clear signal that the first

11
     El Tiempo “Betancur no sabe cuánto vale lo que ofrece: Turbay,” May 4th, 1978.
12
     El Tiempo, “Habrá política económica sin sobresaltos,” August 10th, 1978.
Economic Technocrats in Colombia                                              83

independent president in 150 years would respect technocratic continuity
and fiscal responsibility. Similarly, Uribe selected Santiago Montenegro, also a
reputed member of the Colombian technocracy, to head the NPD. As discussed
below, at the height of his popularity and under better economic conditions,
President Uribe did take some actions that clashed with economic experts
and even appointed a less technically qualified minister in his second term.
Nonetheless, he ultimately maintained a considerable level of technical exper-
tise in these institutions.
    These examples show the extreme awareness Colombian politicians have
regarding the political cost of mismanaging the economy. Experts constitute
a guarantee, or at least a signal, of proper management. These actions show
that politicians perceive breaking the informal rule of technical appointment
as politically risky.
    Regarding my second factor, since the sixties there has been a plural and
balanced constellation of stakeholders in Colombia. Political parties, busi-
ness associations, and IFIs all have an interest in economic policy making. The
power of these actors has varied over time, with some gaining more power and
others losing it, but most of these plural forces have coexisted for the last six
decades. All these actors closely follow economic decisions and expect techni-
cal picks during changes of ministers. Incumbents are aware that not meeting
these expectations will produce a backlash from these actors. Experts profit
from these cross-pressures that limit the control of any one actor over eco-
nomic policy. Técnicos represent a guarantee to all actors that there will be
no abrupt changes to the status quo. As a result, experts have more leeway to
advance their policies and remain autonomous.
    For most of the period under study, two political parties dominated
Colombian politics, making it more difficult for incumbents to take control
over economic policy areas. As mentioned, the political opposition closely
monitors economic agencies. Profligate ministers constitute a risk to the oppo-
sitions’ electoral chances. In Colombia, the opposition party traditionally kept
a close eye on the incumbent to prevent the use of economic policy in the
incumbent’s favor.
    An incident shortly after the end of Carlos Lleras’ government that threat-
ened technical continuity exemplifies the check each party held over the other.
This incident also demonstrates the importance of maintaining high levels of
technical expertise in economic institutions for Colombian presidents as early
as the 1970s and the mechanisms through which stakeholders protected tech-
nical continuity. Conservative President Misael Pastrana (1970–1974), the
last NF president, confirmed the appointment of Jorge Ruíz Lara, a former
Monetary Board adviser and member of Lleras’s technical team, to head the
NPD. Some months later, however, Pastrana clashed with Lara and NPD offi-
cials over the priorities of the development plan approved by Lleras. Pastrana’s
actions were perceived as an effort to politicize the NPD, which led Lara to
resign (Gutiérrez Sanín 1997; Schmidt 1974, 442–443).
84                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

    Liberal leaders criticized Pastrana’s decision for breaking the commitment
to nonpartisan economic policy (interview with Perry 2008). Experts also
expressed their dissatisfaction with the decision and warned about the costs of
politicizing the NPD (Schmidt 1974, 442–443). Ultimately, those criticisms led
Pastrana to appoint an expert, Roberto Arenas, as head of NPD. Although a
conservative loyalist, Arenas had a technical education that guaranteed respon-
sible, nonpartisan management of the NPD. The prestigious economist Lauchlin
Currie became Pastrana and Arenas’s adviser, a clear signal from the president
that partisan use of the NPD would not be tolerated (interview with Arenas
2006). Even though several members of the departing economic team, as well
as former President Lleras Restrepo himself, criticized the content of Pastrana’s
new development plan, its technical quality was not disputed (Arenas 1972, 3;
CORP 1972; interview with Botero 2009). Liberal Alfonso López Michelsen
won the next election (1974–1978) and rehired the experts that had left during
Pastrana’s government. As this conflict shows, powerful political actors con-
strained the incumbent to respect the informal rule of appointing technocrats
to stop politicians from abusing macroeconomic policy. Thus, criticisms from
liberal party leaders helped maintain a technical NPD in 1970.
    Similarly, in Colombia there is a long history of IFI involvement in economic
policy. IFIs are especially influential in periods of economic hardship, but there
is continuous interaction with national governments even in good economic
conditions. These institutions demand incumbents maintain a sound economic
policy, which puts pressures on politicians to keep experts in their positions.
As a result, experts’ have more space to exercise their autonomy. The original
appointment of experts is partially explained by pressure from IFIs. Experts
were appointed to even out the technical disparity between IFI negotiations
and the Colombian state (Botero 2005, 21). Negotiations with IFIs, and the
need to respond technically to their demands, augment the space for technical
autonomy.
    Another factor facilitating the establishment of technocratic autonomy has
been a fragmented private sector during those years that only became more atom-
ized due to experts’ promotion of nontraditional exports. Business associations
are crucial stakeholders and exemplify how these cross-pressures restrain polit-
ical intervention into economic policy and give experts more space. Colombia
boasts several well-organized business associations, including powerful federa-
tions of industrial interests (Asociación Nacional de Empresarios de Colombia,
ANDI), banks (Asociación Bancaria y de Entidades Financieras de Colombia,
ASOBANCARIA), coffee growers (Federación Nacional de Cafeteros), finan-
cial institutions (Asociación Nacional de Instituciones Financieras, ANIF), and,
more recently, an “association of associations” (Consejo Gremial) (Schneider
2004; Juárez 1993b, 17). These associations are often headed by former min-
isters of finance or NPD directors and produce highly technical reports on
­economic policy. In addition, these groups organize public forums where
 experts are invited to debate policy options (interviews with Echeverry 2008,
Economic Technocrats in Colombia                                                            85

Junguito 2008 and Montenegro 2008). The opinions of these groups tend to
be very technical and, even when coming from particular interests, are usually
worded as promoting public welfare. By keeping a close eye on economic pol-
icy and making demands that frequently contrast with those of politicians and
IFIs, business actors enhance experts’ autonomy and make technical cadres in
economic positions a necessity.
    Uribe’s government highlights the importance of stakeholders for restrain-
ing even popular and charismatic incumbents in the absence of strong politi-
cal opposition. During Uribe’s first administration, technical autonomy came
under pressure. Minister Junguito lasted a year in his position.13 According to
the press, Uribe’s style, as well as his tendency to constantly voice his opinion
about economic policy, soon led to Junguito’s resignation. The president, for
example, publicly asked the Central Bank not to raise interest rates, which
many saw as an attempt to influence an independent institution.14 Junguito’s
resignation raised concerns among economic analysts who viewed him as a
minister with enough clout to limit the president’s power.15
    Uribe appointed Alberto Carrasquilla, a minister with technical credentials,
though less political aptitude. The press immediately voiced criticism from eco-
nomic and political stakeholders who worried about this move’s potential con-
sequences for economic stability.16 Nonetheless, Carrasquilla quickly showed
that he was not Uribe’s puppet. He opposed Uribe’s intrusion into economic
policy, as several clashes leaked to the public demonstrate.17 In his second term
(2006–2010), after winning reelection with an impressive 64 percent of the,
thanks in part to significantly improved economic conditions, Uribe struck a
stronger blow against economic expertise. For the first time in decades, the
president chose a political appointee, Oscar Zuluaga, to head the MF. Although
Zuluaga had an MA in economics and experience in business, he was a poli-
tician close to Uribe. Similarly, while the technical abilities of Uribe’s second
director of NPD were not in dispute, her credentials were less impressive than
her predecessor’s, and she also was considered close to the president.
    Again, economic analysts in the press questioned the decision to name a
more political minister of finance, calling it a risky break with tradition. The
press also speculated about how this decision would be received by external
stakeholders such as the WB, the IMF, and business investors.18 Further, several


13
     El Tiempo, “Renunció Junguito,” June 7th, 2003.
14
     The bank raised the interest rate anyway, disregarding the president’s advice.
15
     El Tiempo, “Reacciones,” June 7th, 2003.
16
     El Tiempo, “Editorial,” June 8th and June 15th, 2003.
17
     El Tiempo, “Carrasquilla, en el ojo del huracán,” November 27th, 2003 and “¿Ahora sí se va
     Carrasquilla?” January 31st, 2007.
18
     El Tiempo, “Uribe, a punto de optar por Minhacienda político,” February 14th, 2007; “Oscar
     Iván Zuluaga, nuevo Minhacienda,” February 17th, 2007; “Con Oscar Iván Zuluaga llega un
     político al Minhacienda y un escudero del gobierno al Congreso,” February 18th, 2007.
86                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

senior technocrats publicly criticized Uribe during those years for bending
the informal rules of economic policy making in Colombia (Botero 2010, 8;
­interviews with A. Gaviria 2008 and Kalmanovitz 2008).
    Partly due to this scrutiny, the technical level of economic personnel remained
 fairly high under Uribe. Zuluaga kept technical vice ministers and did not pro-
 foundly change the MF’s policy style (interview with Botero 2009). According
 to then Director of Fedesarrollo Roberto Steiner, Zuluaga in the end was “one
 of the boys”; he had economic training and was aware of the costs of politiciz-
 ing economic policy (interview with Steiner 2009). Stakeholders, then, consti-
 tuted an important limit to the politicization of the economy.
    The technical aspects of policy factors also scored high for this economic
 episode, contributing to the high technical level of economic policy making.
 Regarding the complexity of technocratic knowledge, economic experts had
 a significant advantage over other actors. As discussed previously, technocrats
 used their expertise to increase the complexity of economic policy making. From
 then on, economic policy became a highly technical discipline, only accessible
 to those with expert mathematical, econometric, and statistical knowledge that
 vastly exceeded the capacity of others actors. This disparity made it easier for
 experts to take control of economic policy making.
    As mentioned, the Universidad de Los Andes and CEDE, as well as foreign
 institutions, supported students undertaking postgraduate studies in econom-
 ics at highly reputable universities. The idea was that these young PhDs would
 return to teach and conduct research in Colombian universities, but many
 ended up working in the new economic institutions (interviews with Junguito
 2008; Perry 2008; Urrutia 2008). The new crop of técnicos brought with them
 econometric and mathematical skills that were rare in Colombia and distin-
 guished them from the politicians and bureaucrats who had previously man-
 aged economic policy.
    The new experts called their predecessors “empíricos,” indicating that
 their expertise came from experience and not from real academic knowledge
 (Montenegro 2010, 16; Botero 2004, 17). Former Minister Rodrigo Botero
 recalls that it was common in cabinet meetings to hear nationalistic speeches
 justifying tariff protections or predicting dire consequences if experts’ propos-
 als were approved. The National Federation of Coffee Growers, for example,
 highlighted the importance of coffee to the Colombian economy in order to
 claim that the interests of coffee producers were the interests of the nation.
 Experts opposed these rhetorical claims with economic models and projections,
 calculated by Colombia’s first computers (Botero 2004, 17). The ­projections
 showed that the alleged negative consequences of their proposals were much
 less severe than predicted, while showing that what benefitted coffee growers
 was not necessarily good for the nation.
    Since then, economic policy debates in Colombia have only become more
 technically complex. According to Botero, this increase in the state’s technical
 capabilities later prompted an increase in technical capabilities in the private
Economic Technocrats in Colombia                                               87

sector as business associations’ policy proposals now had to be defensible in
technical terms (interview with Botero 2009; Botero 2004, 17).
   This complexity also increases experts’ leverage by making the consequences
of policy decisions difficult for politicians to assess. Experts can thus dissuade
politicians from pursuing certain policies by pointing out risks that they might
not otherwise see. In the eighties, for example, the Ministry of Finance advised
politicians not to borrow from international banks as many Latin American
countries were doing (Thorp and Durand 1997, 223). Technocrats alerted the
incumbent to the risks of taking out large loans and encouraged politicians
to stand firm against international and domestic pressures (Botero 2005, 22;
Botero 1976). The incumbent followed the experts’ advice. Although criticized
by politicians and business associations at the time, this decision helped spare
Colombia from the effects of the debt crisis that produced economic disasters
elsewhere in the region. In sum, the complexity of economic policy, especially
given the scarcity of economic knowledge in Colombia, allowed experts to gain
control over this policy area.
   The second factor, consensus among experts, was also high. This factor is
crucial in explaining the success of experts’ strategies and the early emergence
of a technocracy in Colombia. This fundamental agreement legitimates experts’
favored policies among the epistemic community of Colombian economists,
thus making it more difficult to justify any deviation from their policy prescrip-
tions. Even if individual experts are fired, their replacements are likely to hold
broadly similar views, thereby limiting the potential for major policy shifts.
   The young Colombian experts who entered government in the late fifties
and sixties shared a consensus about economic policy that derived from the
core of economic ideas they had absorbed while studying abroad. This fun-
damental consensus advocated tight control of public debt, prudent monetary
policy, market diversification through export-oriented development, and low
tolerance for inflation (Meisel Roca 1997; Botero 2005, 21; Urrutia 2008, 72;
interviews with Junguito 2008 and Perry 2008).
   In line with these ideas, experts opposed what they considered negative and
costly aspects of Colombia’s ISI model as well as the economy’s overdepen-
dence on coffee exports. Like their political superiors, experts disapproved of
the institutional framework for policy making that limited executive power
over economic policy but also saw many other reforms as necessary. Once
they occupied influential positions, técnicos took gradual but firm steps toward
reducing Colombia’s dependence on coffee exports and strengthening public
participation in areas of the economy where the state lacked a competitive
advantage (e.g., in communications as well as in shipping ports and energy
distribution) (Botero 2010, 7).
   The level of consensus among experts during this period was remarkably
high when compared to other Latin American countries where debates over
economic policy were fierce. These debates, which the next chapter discusses in
the context of Peru, were inspired by competing economic policy paradigms. On
88                                     Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

the contrary, Colombian experts debated economic management in ­technical
terms while agreeing on some basic ideas of what constituted adequate policy.
   Although during President Pastrana’s administration (1970–1974) there
were divergences among experts about the best policy options, these debates
were based on some shared technical basis. The strong criticisms of Pastrana’s
development plan, for example, were made in highly technical terms (CORP
1972). Similarly, in the eighties, experts debated the “correct” degree of market
liberalization but agreed on the overall thrust of policy reform (Ocampo and
Sarmiento 1987; Lora 1991).
   Some observers separate Colombian experts into various factions according
to supposed different ideological positions. Experts displayed these particu-
lar differences in the debate during the eighties and nineties about the proper
degree of liberalization of the economy (Estrada Álvarez 2005, 297–298).
Also in 1990, during the process of enacting market reforms, Finance Minister
Rudolf Hommes and his economic team clashed with Development Minister
Ernesto Samper and his reputable technocratic advisers José Antonio Ocampo
and Guillermo Perry about the adequate degree and timing of the trade opening
(Flórez Enciso 2010).19 However, according to two members of the Colombian
technocracy who occupied opposite sides of this proposed ideological spec-
trum, these differences were rather moderate (interviews with Steiner 2009 and
Perry 2008). Furthermore, when compared to the divisions between Peruvian
economic experts in the early eighties, they appear even less significant.
   As a result, Colombian politicians are limited to selecting their economic
officials from a pool of experts that share a general policy consensus. Choosing
officials from outside this group is easily criticized as irresponsible. As previously
mentioned, when President Pastrana clashed with NPD officials, he appointed
new experts that shared this broad consensus. Similarly, when President Alfonso
López Michelsen (1974–1978) fired Minister Rodrigo Botero in 1976 after a
series of conflicts with business interests, López appointed a previous minister
of finance who guaranteed technical continuity.20
   In sum, high scores in these four factors made economic policy agencies a
more likely area for technical autonomy, leading to experts’ entrenchment in
the Colombian state. These factors explain the exception of the economic tech-
nocracy, where many other reform efforts to strengthen policy areas during the
National Front failed.


Conclusion
This Colombian economic episode clearly shows the crafting of technical
autonomy and its entrenchment over time. Experts’ strategic actions, including

19
     El Tiempo, “Hommes vs. Samper. Primer Round,” October 28th, 1990.
20
     El Tiempo, “Abdón Espinosa Valderrama, nuevo Ministro de Hacienda,” December 18th, 1976;
     El Espectador, “No habrá timonazo económico: Min-Hacienda,” January 17th, 1981.
Economic Technocrats in Colombia                                               89

the active exclusion of less qualified actors from policy making and adopting
institutions to ensure their continuity, were important for achieving technical
autonomy. Technocrats achieved this entrenchment even though Colombia did
not suffer the severe economic crises that occurred elsewhere in Latin America
and, as we will see, catapulted Peruvian experts to power. Colombian techno-
crats entrenched this technical autonomy step by step, by building an epistemic
community within the state and civil society, which demonstrates that experts’
strategic actions helped advance their autonomy.
   The four factors my theory identifies as facilitating technocratic autonomy
scored high for Colombia. My two politics of policy factors scored high, as
is usually the case in economic policy. First, previous crises made incumbents
aware of the costs of delivering poor economic policy. Additionally, a balanced
constellation of powerful stakeholders increased the space experts had to adopt
their own decisions while preventing backlashes against themselves.
   Scores in the technical aspects of policy factors have also been high since
the sixties in Colombia. The complexity of economic policy made it necessary
for politicians to delegate economic management to experts and facilitated
experts’ exclusion of other actors from policy making. Experts’ own work
raised the level of technical knowledge required to participate in economic
debates, which in turn contributed to greater technical sophistication among
economic actors in Colombia. Lastly, the first group of experts shared a basic
consensus of what constituted proper economic policy and successfully repro-
duced this consensus in subsequent generations of Colombian economists. This
early consensus among experts helps explain the rise of técnicos in this coun-
try long before they arose in other Latin American countries. This consensus
also limited the available options in economic policy. The contrast with early
Peruvian technocrats, who disagreed strongly on policy, highlights the rele-
vance of this factor for technocratic autonomy. A well-entrenched technocracy
exists today in Colombia.
   After Uribe left the presidency in 2010, the technocracy regained its suprem-
acy over economic policy and other policy areas in the state. Juan Manuel
Santos, Colombia’s new president and former minister of finance, appointed
reputed Colombian technocrats to head the NPD and MF as well as other sec-
tors like health and agriculture. His first cabinet was considered as technocratic
as those of Lleras Restrepo, López, or Gaviria. Technocratic power remains
alive and well in Colombia.21 As mentioned playfully by Rodrigo Botero, “In
Colombia it is nowadays easier to predict who will be the next minister of
finance than to guess who will be the next president” (interview with Botero
2009).




21
     Semana “Dream Team,” July 7th, 2010.
5

Economic Technocrats in Peru
(1980–1983; 1990–2013)




Economic technocrats in Peru entrenched their autonomy in the Ministry of
Economics and Finance (MEF) during Alberto Fujimori’s first administration
(1990–1995). Appointed to fight hyperinflation and implement drastic market
reforms, technocrats were successful in transforming the Peruvian economy
according to their preferences and, in the process, gained considerable auton-
omy (Abusada et al. 2000; Cortázar 2006; Dargent 2008; Wise 2003). This
technocratic autonomy has remained quite high under the more competitive
democratic regime that was instituted after Fujimori’s downfall in 2000 due to
a corruption scandal. Even President Ollanta Humala (2011–), a strong critic
of the “neoliberal” economic model associated with MEF technocrats, main-
tained this technocratic continuity in the ministry after his election.
   Peru, however, also experienced an earlier episode in which technocrats
failed to entrench themselves in the MEF. During Fernando Belaúnde’s sec-
ond administration (1980–1985), orthodox economic experts appointed to the
MEF initially had significant control over economic policy. These experts, which
the press dubbed “Team Dynamo,” were insulated from political and business
pressures in an effort to implement orthodox economic reforms designed to
dismantle Peru’s inefficient Import Substitution Industrialization Model (ISI)
development model (Conaghan and Malloy 1994; Wise 1986; Webb 1994). Yet
eventually, the economic team failed to counter criticisms from politicians and
business leaders that questioned both the reforms and the imperious style of
decision making. In 1983, Belaúnde fired these experts and a similarly strong
technical team did not return to the MEF until 1990. I argue that lower scores
in both of the politics of policy factors and in one of the technical aspects of
policy factors from my theory explain this lack of entrenchment. The incum-
bent, and politicians in general, did not fully comprehend the political costs of
poor policy performance, and the constellation of stakeholders in economic
policy was unbalanced. Additionally, during the eighties in Peru, there was no


90
Economic Technocrats in Peru                                                   91

technical consensus about what constituted adequate economic policy, which
made unseating orthodox experts easier. The contrast between these two eco-
nomic episodes supports my theory and highlights how the factors I propose
contribute to technical autonomy and entrenchment.
   The chapter proceeds as follows. The first section examines the first techno-
cratic experience, highlighting how “Team Dynamo” faced unfavorable condi-
tions for technical autonomy that eventually led to its dismissal. The second
section discusses the rise of técnicos under President Fujimori and their continu-
ity even after he left power. In this section, I demonstrate how technocrats were
autonomous from politicians, by highlighting the restraints experts imposed on
political actors and businesses, and by discussing the limitations of perspectives
that see the private sector as the source of current technocratic power in the
MEF. Although less concerned with institution building than are Colombian
experts, I show in the third section that Peruvian technocrats have also acted
strategically to insulate the MEF’s autonomy. In the fourth section, I explain
how the higher scores in the four factors of my theory explain entrenchment in
this second economic episode.


Economic Technocrats in the Eighties
After twelve years of military rule, Fernando Belaúnde (1980–1985), the pres-
ident the armed forces had ousted in 1968, won the 1980 presidential elec-
tion. Belaúnde appointed Manuel Ulloa, a lawyer and businessman, as his
cabinet chief and minister of economy. Ulloa recruited a group of economic
experts charged with reforming Peru’s struggling ISI model (Webb 1994, 357).
Adopted during Juan Velasco Alvarado’s (1968–1975) revolutionary military
government (Trimberger 1978; Stepan 1978: Lowenthal 1975), economic pol-
icy under ISI included increasing protective tariffs for local industry, national-
izing numerous foreign-owned firms especially in mining and oil, and creating
multiple state corporations. The second phase of the military government,
under the Presidency of Francisco Morales Bermúdez (1975–1980), had to
deal with the high costs of this hastily imposed development model (Conaghan
and Malloy 1994). Following successful negotiations with IFIs to obtain more
international loans, the military government began to dismantle the ISI model
(Mauceri 1995, 11).
   These measures, however, faced stiff resistance from unions and political
parties that demanded deepening, rather than dismantling, ISI. These groups
were well represented in the 1978 Constituent Assembly and successfully
pushed for the inclusion of substantial social and economic rights in the 1979
Constitution in an attempt to institutionalize ISI policies. When they took office
after the 1980 election, Belaúnde and his Acción Popular (AP) party were not
committed neoliberal reformers. Bealúnde believed that massive infrastructure
projects would foster medium-term development that justified a public deficit
92                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

in the short term. However, the president also understood that the only way
to finance these projects was with international loans that were conditional on
“putting the house in order” through IFI-backed neoliberal reforms (interview
with Abusada 2010). The only clear domestic political support for an orthodox
reform plan came from the Partido Popular Cristiano (PPC), a small right-wing
political party in the governing coalition.
    As a result, the new AP-PPC government faced a dilemma: orthodox eco-
nomic reform seemed necessary to stabilize the economy but precluded politi-
cians from following through on their campaign promises or delivering material
goods to their constituencies. Belaúnde opted for a mixed strategy: insulate
“Team Dynamo” in the MEF to allow them to implement neoliberal economic
reforms, while developing infrastructure projects in the country in response to
social and political demands. Belaúnde’s preferences were never clearly aligned
with those of his technical team, and tension between the two emerged in the
following months.
    The leader of the technical team was Roberto Abusada, a young expert
appointed as vice minister of commerce in the MEF. Given Ulloa’s responsibil-
ities as cabinet chief, Abusada gained considerable control over the ­ministry’s
day-to-day operations (interviews with Abusada 2010, Hume 2007 and Arrieta
2007). Other members of the team serving as vice ministers and advisers in
MEF were U.S.-trained economists, such as Jorge González Izquierdo and Brian
Jensen, and professors of economics or engineering at the Pontificia Universidad
Católica del Perú (interviews with Arrieta 2007 and Hume 2007).
    From the time it was appointed, this economic team was quite insulated.
Politicians and businessmen criticized experts for being too “theoretical”
and lacking “practical” knowledge (Conaghan and Malloy 1994, 152–155;
Mauceri 1995). Ulloa was the only contact between the president, his party,
and the MEF. Due to this insulation, business groups’ demands were mostly
channeled through other members of the government, such as the minister of
labor.
    Experts designed a series of tax, financial, and commercial reforms to imple-
ment immediately after Belaúnde’s inauguration in July 1980 (Webb 1994,
359–366). Two very sensitive political issues were included in this plan: tech-
nical control over foreign credit to finance public works and the privatization
of state enterprises that were a source of political patronage (Pastor and Wise
1992, 87). Also, experts proposed incentives to promote foreign investment
in agriculture and mining (Pastor and Wise 1992; Webb 1994). Even though
nominally neoliberal, these reforms included what most contemporary econo-
mists would consider commonsensical measures, such as reducing the mount-
ing public deficit, halting inflation, lowering costly subsidies of little impact,
and privatizing some noncompetitive state enterprises (interview with Abusada
2010).
    From the beginning, experts had a limited capacity to carry out their ­policy
preferences. A first obstacle arose soon after experts arrived in the MEF.
Economic Technocrats in Peru                                                 93

President Belaúnde and Acción Popular requested the ministry delay reforms
until after the November municipal elections because they believed remov-
ing price subsidies would hurt their electoral interests (Conaghan and Malloy
1994, 152; Webb 1994; interviews with Abusada 2010 and Hume 2007). The
MEF agreed, but the planned reforms did eventually proceed following the
elections. Several of these reforms were instituted using the president’s broad
emergency powers conferred in the 1979 Constitution to avoid congressional
negotiations.
   The team undeniably implemented some of its proposals, especially in inter-
national trade, which shows meaningful technical autonomy. Tariffs were
reduced from an average of 66 percent to 32 percent in 1981 (Wise 1986,
27). Sticking to an orthodox agenda, the team even cut subsidies for nontra-
ditional exports, a sector that could have served as an ally (Webb 1994, 364).
The state’s credit for manufacturers was drastically cut from 20 percent to
2 percent in 1982, and 98 percent of previously restricted goods could now be
imported freely (Wise 1986, 27).
   However, experts failed to achieve their goals in other areas, demonstrating
that technical autonomy was limited in the early eighties when compared to
the Colombian and later Peruvian cases. Very few state enterprises were priva-
tized, none of which were major firms. Foreign investment did not arrive as
expected, partly due to investors’ lack of confidence that Peru would not make
another statist turn (Pastor and Wise 1992, 88). In addition, although the MEF
adopted regulations to limit international borrowing, it lost the battle to con-
trol the foreign loans used to finance infrastructure projects (Webb 1994, 361;
Mauceri 1995, 12). The fiscal deficit even grew from 3.9 percent in 1980 to
6.7 percent in 1981. The debt crisis hit Peru in 1983, which placed more pres-
sure on experts. Floods in northern Peru and attacks from the Shining Path, a
radical Maoist guerrilla group, put the government under even more stress.
   Partly due to these problems, Ulloa left government in January 1983.
Abusada had resigned several months before. Former central banker Carlos
Rodríguez Pastor was appointed to head the MEF while several members of
Ulloa’s team remained in their positions. However, dealing with the debt crisis
consumed all of the new minister’s time and brought reform efforts to a halt
(interviews with Hume 2007 and Webb 2007; Webb 1994, 366–367). Although
more technically trained than Ulloa, Rodríguez Pastor lacked his political
experience and, after facing similar pressure from politicians, was soon fired.
A political appointment was made to appease opposition from politicians and
business. The new minister, a member of Acción Popular, increased import
tariffs, adopted new industrial subsidies, and restored some export subsidies
(Webb 1994, 367). Furthermore, in an effort to take control over tariffs away
from the MEF, the vice ministry of commerce was transferred to the Ministry
of Industry. Belaúnde’s final minister was more technically oriented and made
some serious efforts to restore fiscal discipline but lacked the political power
to do so.
94                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

     Why did experts fail to entrench the significant autonomy they had ­during
the early eighties? Evidence of this autonomy is their high insulation and
­influence over policy making. Although they did not achieve the level of com-
 prehensive reform they desired, technocrats did implement noteworthy changes
 to economic policy. Nonetheless, experts possessed autonomy only in areas
 where they shared preferences with politicians and other actors, which was not
 enough to achieve continuity.
     I argue that three of the factors in my technocratic autonomy theory
 explain técnicos’ downfall. Even though economic policy is an area where
 technical autonomy is expected, and entrenchment more likely, the politics of
 policy factors were not as favorable as they would be in later years or as they
 were in Colombia during the sixties. First, politicians were inexperienced
 after twelve years of military dictatorship. They saw the state-centered eco-
 nomic model as a source of clientistic resources but did not fully appreciate
 the political costs of its inefficiencies. The hyperinflationary crisis later in
 the decade taught them that lesson. Second, the absence of a balanced con-
 stellation of stakeholders limited the possibility of maintaining technocratic
 autonomy. Several actors that otherwise might have counterbalanced politi-
 cians’ interests aligned with political actors in attacking experts. In addition,
 the lack of technical consensus on economic policy facilitated politicians’
 and business’ opposition to MEF experts by providing alternatives to expert-
 sponsored policies.
     A crucial factor that limited experts’ autonomy was the lack of urgency
 among politicians to address the deteriorating economic conditions (Conaghan
 and Malloy 1994, 152–155). Politicians, including members of the incumbent
 AP, understood the political costs of poor economic policy performance but
 not the serious repercussions of maintaining their patronage privileges or the
 important economic consequences of a high public deficit. Furthermore, poli-
 ticians were more focused on building (or rebuilding) their patronage link-
 ages. Therefore, congressmen and members of the executive branch from AP
 pushed for higher expenditures. The public deficit continued to grow and pub-
 lic enterprises became more inefficient, but políticos kept demanding patron-
 age resources and opposed experts seeking to reign in debt spending. The best
 example is the AP’s request that experts delay launching the emergency reforms
 for four months until after local elections.
     The constellation of stakeholders, usually more balanced in economic
 policy areas where business and IFI interests are at play, was unbalanced in
 Peru partly due to experts’ confrontational strategies. The immediate cause of
 technocrats’ demise was political and business interests’ opposition to their
 reforms. Predictably, orthodox experts encountered strong opposition from
 leftist parties and labor unions. However, they also faced coordinated pressure
 from the incumbent’s party and business associations. Only IFIs supported the
 reforms; all other actors opposed experts in a clearly unbalanced constellation
 of stakeholders.
Economic Technocrats in Peru                                                                  95

   To begin with, Acción Popular, especially a faction in Congress known as
“provincianos,” questioned the direction of the reforms. Javier Alva Orlandini,
vice president (1980–1985) and congressional leader of AP in the Senate, was
the main opponent of Ulloa’s reforms.1 María Jesús Hume, a member of the
team and later vice minister of commerce, attributes this resistance from AP
politicians to the politicians’ vested interests in public works and especially
public enterprises (interview with Hume 2007). Because public enterprises
offered well-paid patronage jobs, politicians of all partisan affiliations stood to
lose from reforms. Facing opposition from within his own party, Belaúnde, as
mentioned, did not actively support his economic team.
   Business associations also mounted a strong campaign against the experts.
As one might expect, the most forceful criticism of Team Dynamo’s reforms
came from the National Society of Industries, which claimed that the trade
liberalization was destroying local manufacturing (Conaghan and Malloy
1994,153; interview with Webb 2007). Unexpectedly, similar attacks came from
the association of exporters, who were supposed to benefit from the reforms
in the medium term. However, various measures, such as a large reduction in
export incentives, negatively affected exporters in the short run and led them to
strongly criticize the reforms (Conaghan and Malloy 1994, 116). Thus, experts
antagonized even those business sectors that they had hoped would support
their goals. Under these conditions, experts’ only allies were the IFIs. Business
stakeholders, who just a decade later would value technocrats as guarantors of
economic stability, were deeply critical of them.
   Turning to the effects of technical knowledge, the lack of consensus among
Peruvian economists made MEF experts more vulnerable. Criticisms from
politicians and businesses were based on the assessments of other economic
experts, who proposed alternative approaches to fixing the worsening eco-
nomic conditions. The debates among economists mirrored the strong ideolog-
ical polarization that prevailed in Peru during those years. Technocrats urging
market reforms were counterbalanced by other experts who saw more, rather
than less, state ownership and protectionism as the solution. This lack of con-
sensus is aptly described by the president of the Central Bank (1980–1985),
Richard Webb:
From the late 1970s through 1985, with the exception of part of 1984, the Presidents in
power and their economic teams were pushing an adjustment and reform agenda that
was perceived as radical, exaggerated, insensitive, and technically flawed by a majority
of the public. Most academic and professional “expert” opinion kept up a continuous
critical barrage. Although the motivation was partly political, and partly linked to inter-
ests groups, much of the criticism was sincere. (Webb 1994, 372–373)



1
    In La República, January 7th, 1982, Alva publicly criticized that “technocrats do not identify
    themselves with the “populist” ideals of Acción Popular” and accused them of “lacking contact
    with the people.”
96                                        Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

   Parties’ campaign platforms in the 1980 election demonstrate this strong
polarization (Universidad del Pacífico 1979). These platforms presented an
impressive range of divergent economic proposals. Leftist parties promoted the
nationalization of enterprises to achieve economic independence and reduce
the power of the ruling classes. Even in the 1985 and 1990 elections, the United
Left’s (Izquierda Unida) government plans, drawn up by the party’s economic
advisers, continued to show support for a decidedly non-neoliberal program of
state-led development (Izquierda Unida 1985; 1990; see also Malpica 1985).2
Centrist parties were considerably less radical, but also defended ISI subsidies
and public ownership of certain enterprises. On the other side of the spectrum,
small right-wing parties such as the PPC proposed market reforms similar to
those advanced by MEF technocrats.
   This lack of agreement on economic principles facilitated resistance to
experts from politicians and business interests. By using the technical assess-
ments of economists who disagreed with orthodox reforms, these actors made
their own opposition appear less particularistic and more publicly oriented,
thus undermining experts’ claim that their measures were absolutely neces-
sary. Alva Orlandini, for example, asked a group of economists in 1981 to
write a report evaluating MEF policies and proposing alternative measures
(Conaghan and Malloy 1994, 154).3 Similarly, business groups that opposed
reforms used alternative economic assessments to justify their positions. For
example, in 1981 and 1982, business associations organized “high profile pub-
lic conferences” where outside economists criticized governmental policies
(Conaghan and Malloy 1994, 154). This disagreement between experts, com-
bined with an unfavorable political context, led to experts failing to maintain
their autonomy.
   For the remainder of the decade, the MEF was weak and politicized. Alan
García’s administration (1985–1990) introduced a series of heterodox eco-
nomic policies that the headstrong young president promoted as a new devel-
opment model. To justify his turn to heterodoxy, García blamed the crisis on
his predecessor’s liberalization efforts. The group of heterodox economists
that the new president appointed as his advisers opted to deepen ISI in order
to solve the country’s economic problems (Thorp 1991, 121–125; Weyland
2002a, 81–84). The economic team worked outside the MEF, while members
of APRA, known as “ministros secretarios” for their subordination to the


2
    These differences increased as the economic crisis mounted. Evidence of how different the evalu-
    ations of the alleged causes and solutions of the crisis were in those years is found in Dancourt
    et al. (1990) where five economists present alternative solutions to the orthodox remedies against
    hyperinflation.
3
    When interviewed for this book, Alva claimed that the press’s version, in which Alva was painted
    as a fierce opponent of Ulloa, was wildly exaggerated. His intention when hiring these econo-
    mists was only to show experts that there were alternatives to the measures they promoted
    (interview with Alva Orlandini 2007).
Economic Technocrats in Peru                                                  97

president and strikingly limited technical credentials, were appointed to the
ministries. García enacted economic policies that IFIs and some local econo-
mists described as suicidal (interview with Abugattás 2007). The success of
García’s program was dependent on the progressive activation of the economy,
which never occurred (Thorp and Durand 1997, 227–228).
   An unprecedented economic crisis exploded in late 1987, but not even this
emergency motivated García to change course and give the MEF more control
over the economy (interview with Abugattás 2007). García preferred to finish
out his term without suffering the political costs of drastic market reforms. The
availability of economic options justified his decision to avoid painful adjust-
ments (Weyland 2002a, 87–91).
   The crisis caused severe political damage to the president and incumbent
party. Polls (Apoyo Opinión y Mercado) from those years show how the eco-
nomic crisis demolished Garcia’s image. During his first two years in office,
the president enjoyed overwhelming popularity, with approval ratings between
82 percent and 67 percent. When the economic crisis began in June 1987,
García’s popularity stood at 52 percent. These numbers plunged in the fol-
lowing months, reaching the low teens in 1989 before climbing slightly to the
low twenties when García left office in July 1990. Inflation gradually became
the most important problem in Peru, above terrorism and unemployment, and
pessimism about the economy drastically mounted among the population. In
July 1988, 73 percent of Peruvians disapproved of the government’s economic
policy and 62 percent believed that the economic situation would only worsen
in the future. In April 1989, 89 percent of respondents considered the eco-
nomic situation as bad. Certainly, the activity of the Shining Path also hurt the
president’s approval rating. However, because the level of political violence
remained constant throughout García’s administration, it does not explain the
sharp drop in his popularity.
   As all these numbers show, the economic crisis imposed immediate and
debilitating political costs on the incumbent and severely jeopardized APRA’s
electoral interests. APRA came in third in the 1990 election with only 22 per-
cent of the vote, a far cry from the 50 percent it had won in 1985. The crisis
taught the lesson that prudent economic management was crucial to political
success and that not doing so was costly.

The Rise and Consolidation of Neoliberal Experts
(1990–2013)
A decade later, neoliberal experts succeeded where Team Dynamo failed.
Since 1990, a technocracy has firmly established itself in the MEF. Peruvians
hold widely ranging views of MEF technocrats. For some, this technocracy
is responsible for two decades of economic stability and impressive growth.
For others, experts represent a detached-from-reality group that is more con-
cerned with business interests than the “real” needs of the people. Furthermore,
98                              Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

some question the undemocratic character of experts who seemingly force
politicians into straitjackets that impede them from fulfilling their campaign
promises. What neither supporters nor opponents deny is, in contrast with pre-
vious periods, the power of experts in Peru.
   Economic technocrats were appointed when newly elected President Alberto
Fujimori (1990–2000) realized that he needed qualified economists to com-
bat the hyperinflationary crisis inherited from Alan García. A political out-
sider who rose at the last minute to defeat favored right-wing candidate Mario
Vargas Llosa in the 1990 elections, Fujimori lacked a government program and
a political party from which to recruit técnicos (Mauceri 1995, Cortázar 2006,
15–17; 18–19; interview with Du Bois 2007).
   During the campaign, Fujimori had opposed Vargas Llosa’s proposed neolib-
eral stabilization plan. However, facing strong demands from IFIs and foreign
governments once in office, the new president opted for a drastic set of ortho-
dox reforms that were enacted shortly after his inauguration (Stokes 2001,
47–53; Weyland 2002a, 116–118). Fujimori’s first two ministers of economy,
Juan Carlos Hurtado Miller (July 1990–February 1991) and especially Carlos
Boloña (February 1991–January 1993), recruited the economic experts who
designed and implemented these measures. Usually appointed as consultants
or advisers to the minister’s cabinet, technocrats initiated ambitious market
reforms that transformed the Peruvian state and the structure of the economy
(Abusada et al., 2000; Conaghan 1998; Dargent 2008; Ugarte 2000, 410; Wise
2003).
   The crisis allowed for a neoliberal technocracy to emerge and take almost
total control over economic policy, as well as negotiations with IFIs. Experts
perceived these severe crisis conditions as a unique window of opportunity to
achieve the changes they had not achieved in the previous decade (interview
with Du Bois 2007). They reduced tariffs drastically and moved toward an
export-oriented economy through sweeping market reforms. These measures
were adopted quickly, sometimes obstructing and contradicting one another
(Weyland 2002a, 124), with dramatic effects on Peruvian society. Industrialists
lost their leverage while, in the medium term, other business sectors such as
exporters and mining firms became more powerful (Durand 2006). Experts
were also put in charge of broad institutional reforms. They launched an ambi-
tious plan to privatize state-owned enterprises (including banks), shrink the
bureaucracy, reform the pension system, and overhaul commercial and tax law
(Abusada et al. 2000; Weyland 2002a, Wise 2003).
   Peruvian experts were not just following orders from IFIs. Although many
elements followed IFI guidelines, these reforms reflected Peruvian experts’
deep prior commitment to market reforms and their own ambitious agenda.
Experts drew many of their ideas for dismantling the ISI model not from IFIs
but rather from Vargas Llosa’s 1990 government plan (designed in part by
Roberto Abusada). Even stronger evidence that experts acted independently
of international influences is the fact that their reforms were more radical
Economic Technocrats in Peru                                                                99

than those promoted by IFIs (interviews with Du Bois 2007, Hume 2007 and
Abusada 2010).
     The political insulation of Boloña’s team only increased after the 1992
­self-coup when Fujimori closed the Peruvian Congress. Without political oppo-
 sition, the MEF pushed forward several additional reforms by presidential
 decree, including a radical plan to privatize public enterprises (Mauceri 1995,
 26). In contrast to the early 1980s, most state enterprises were privatized. The
 subsequent dominance of Fujimori’s supporters in the new Congress increased
 the economic team’s capacity to implement their reforms. Since then, an annual
 poll has ranked the minister of economics among the ten most powerful indi-
 viduals in the country, showing the importance these officials gained during
 this market reform period.4
     Nonetheless, when the crisis began to subside in 1993, Fujimori dismissed
 Boloña, allegedly because of the business sectors’ dislike of his confrontational
 style. As in the eighties, business groups complained to the president because
 they viewed the technocrats as too insulated from their interests. However, as
 the next section discusses, important stakeholders such as IFIs and business
 interests made it very clear that they did not want the president appointing a
 political lackey to head the MEF. While business actors disliked an insulated
 minister, at the same time these actors demanded clear signals that the economy
 would be kept insulated from political pressures. IFIs were concerned about the
 continuity of reforms. Fujimori chose Jorge Camet (January 1993–June 1998),
 an engineer who had been minister of industry and president of CONFIEP
 (the encompassing business association), as a guarantee that economic stability
 would not be jeopardized. To signal his commitment to a technical approach,
 Camet kept Boloña’s vice ministers as well as part of his technical team with
 two important additions – Roberto Abusada and World Bank official Iván
 Rodríguez and former Minister of Industry (1983–1984)– who had been mem-
 bers of Belaúnde’s first economic team and now served as Camet’s advisers.
     With the crisis receding, MEF experts realized that their political lever-
 age was diminishing. Although privatization continued, the breakneck pace
 of reforms had slowed (Weyland 2002a, 162; interviews with Du Bois 2007
 and Rivera 2011). The MEF focused on guaranteeing macroeconomic stability
 and controlling the public deficit, although they accepted that they could not
 fully reign in military spending or funding for social programs that maintained
 Fujimori’s popularity (interviews with Du Bois 2007 and M. Ugarte 2006).
     The line between technical autonomy and “division of labor” blurred half
 way through Fujimori’s second term (1995–2000). Fujimori’s commitment
 to technical autonomy weakened as he pursued reelection in 2000. Tensions
 emerged between técnicos on the one hand and the president and his military
 allies on the other. Starting in 1997, the military ministers began to voice their

4
    This ranking, previously prepared by Debate, is now prepared by Semana Económica, an influ-
    ential economic magazine. http://elpoderenelperu.com/poderosos/1998
100                                     Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

opinions during cabinet meetings on economic issues that were supposed to be
under the purview of technocrats (interview with M. Ugarte 2006). These ten-
sions led to the dismissal of Camet in June 1998. Although his successor, Jorge
Baca Campodónico, had a more technocratic personal background, he lacked
Camet’s political weight in the cabinet and was dismissed in January 1999.
Baca faced the beginning of an international crisis and was not able to build
good relations with business interests, who strongly criticized him.
    Appointing Víctor Joy Way, a legislator from Fujimori’s party and former
president of Congress, signaled that the president wanted more political con-
trol over economic policy to ensure his reelection to a third, although uncon-
stitutional, term. As a result, the main group of technocrats that had been in
the MEF since the early nineties left, and those who remained recognized that
it had lost some of its political insulation (interviews with Du Bois 2007, M.
Ugarte 2006 and Zamalloa 2007).
    Nonetheless, the risk of politicization was short lived. The 1999 interna-
tional economic crisis made Fujimori retreat and dismiss Joy Way because the
potential cost of poor economic performance in an election year was too high.
In October 1999, businessman Isaac Goldenberg replaced Joy Way. A year
later, Fujimori went as far as to bring back Carlos Boloña in order to recover
some economic credibility lost during the campaign. Boloña announced drastic
spending reductions and more privatizations in an effort to put the economic
program back on track.5
    Shortly after winning reelection, Fujimori resigned from the presidency
due to a corruption scandal. An opposition-led transitional government was
installed to organize elections for early 2001. The caretaker government also
began investigations into corruption within Fujimori’s administration, includ-
ing among some MEF experts. These investigations not only showed that
experts had pragmatically coexisted with mounting corruption in the state but
also led to the prosecution of some former MEF officials for allowing and
allegedly benefitting from illicit activities during those years (Congreso de la
República del Perú 2001).
    Although these events harmed the MEF’s prestige, the demand for technical
policy making remained high. The transition government sent a clear signal of
continuity by tapping Javier Silva Ruete, an economist who had been minister
from 1978 to 1980, to head the MEF. Since then, neoliberal technocrats have
remained in charge of economic policy in Peru, despite the transition to a more
competitive democratic environment.
    As Table 5.1 shows, the MEF has not only maintained its expertise but the
level of technical expertise among economic ministers increased in the 2000s.
During Alejandro Toledo’s administration (2001–2006), all ministers were

5
    El Comercio, “Presidente Fujimori Anuncia Reducción del Gasto Público,” August 15th, 2000.
    The expenditure exceeded by $436 million (U.S. million) the amount in the budget for the first
    six months of the year; El Comercio, “Cambios en Rumbo Económico,” August 20th, 2000.
Economic Technocrats in Peru                                                                       101

table 5.1. Economic Ministers in Peru (1980–2013)

Ministers of Individuals(1) Economists Graduate PhD Previous State              Worked for     Member of
Economy                     (BA or MA) Studies in   Positions                   Business       Incumbent
                                       the US or    in MEF or                   Before or      Political
                                       Europe       Central Bank                After          Party
                                                                                Appointment
July 1980–         10               5            2         1      3                  4               9
   1990
July 1990–          6               2            3         2      1                  5               1
   2000
July 2000–         10               9          10          6      9                  9               0
   2013
1. Carlos Boloña (1991–1992; 2000), Javier Silva Ruete (2000–2001; 2002–2003), Pedro Pablo Kuczynski (2001–
    2002; 2004–2005), and Luis Carranza (2006–2008; 2009–2011) were ­ministers on two occasions.



highly technocratic. Similarly, all four of Alan García’s (2006–2011) ministers
of economy were independent technocrats – that is, the opposite of his politi-
cally subordinate ministers of the 1980s. García’s first minister of economics,
Luis Carranza, was a former vice finance minister in Toledo’s administration.
Even President Ollanta Humala (2011–), who made a failed presidential bid
in 2006 as a strongly “anti-neoliberal” candidate and who still criticized eco-
nomic management during the 2011 campaign, maintained technical continu-
ity in the MEF. Humala appointed García’s last vice minister of finance as his
first minister of economy.
    During these years, macroeconomic policy remained insulated from political
intrusion, showing experts’ clear autonomy from political actors. The end of
hyperinflation in 1991–1993 did not bring the downfall of Peruvian technoc-
racy that some commentators had expected (Conaghan 1998, 160).6 On the
contrary, experts have effectively continued to restrain political expenditures
even during good economic times (2003–2011). According to political-agents
theories, economic abundance should lead to political pressures for increased
expenditure. Certainly, this pressure has existed. The impressive economic
boom of recent years has led congressmen, regional presidents (elected regional
authorities), local authorities, and even the president and ministers to publicly
demand that the MEF loosen restraint on expenditures. Despite this pressure,
the ministry and its experts have successfully held the line on public spending
and effectively reduced politicians’ discretionary expenditures.
    Certain examples show this general pattern of tight economic control and
autonomy from political interests. Technocrats in the MEF have implemented
special programs to prevent patronage spending such as the Sistema Nacional

6
    In Conaghan’s view, the Peruvian case and the events following Boloña’s dismissal raise ques-
    tions about “any overdrawn images about the power and autonomy of technocrats in Latin
    America” (Conaghan 1998, 160).
102                                    Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

de Inversión Pública (National System of Public Investment: SNIP). Beginning
in the late nineties, SNIP required publicly funded projects to gain prior
approval from the MEF. This control produced strong criticism from regional
and local authorities who alleged that the MEF was unreasonably stringent.
More interestingly, incumbents also complained about such control. Presidents
Toledo and García frequently criticized SNIP for not allowing them to fulfill
their electoral promises, but nonetheless kept the system. Experts working in
SNIP mentioned that the support of the minister of the economy and the vice
ministers has been crucial for protecting their work from these external pres-
sures (interviews with Von Hesse 2007 and Prialé 2007).7
   In addition to SNIP, the MEF also developed a national financial system
called the Sistema Integrado de Administración Financiera (SIAF) to control
budget expenditures. Both systems were originally intended to apply only to
executive ministries but have progressively been adopted in other state agen-
cies as well as regional and local governments. The hallmark of both systems is
that they reduce politicians’ latitude to use resources (interviews with Barletti
2007, Mori 2007, and Guerrero 2007). These reforms have strengthened the
technical management of the budget and centralized control over state expen-
ditures, thereby clearly affecting political interests.
   Similarly, MEF experts opposed Toledo’s desire to create a cash transfer
program in Peru similar to the ones already existing in Brazil or Mexico. MEF
experts had divergent opinions about the need and benefits of a cash transfer
program, but they agreed on an important point: thorough reforms to existing
social programs were necessary before launching such an ambitious program
(interview with Arrunátegui 2013). Eventually, the program was launched
(Programa Juntos) but limited to some rural districts. The program has grad-
ually grown during García’s term, and especially under Humala’s administra-
tion, but under close technical supervision to prevent its politicization.
   Another example of experts’ control over political spending is the limitation
the MEF imposed on public expenditures before the 2006 election. Late in
2005, President Toledo publicly promised to not use state resources to influence
the election in the upcoming year, without mentioning any concrete measures.
Following the president’s statement, his cabinet chief Pedro Pablo Kuczynski
and the Minister of Economy Fernando Zavala announced that no more than
60 percent of the executive budget would be spent in the first seven months
of the year. However, this decision was not thoroughly discussed with Toledo;
these ministers simply seized the opportunity and headed off possible patron-
age demands from the incumbent party (interview with Kuczynski 2007).
   As all these examples show, experts have effectively restrained political
interests. This technocratic control did not come easily and involved frequent

7
    This account is confirmed by Toledo’s former head of cabinet, Carlos Ferrero (2003–2005).
    Ferrero witnessed how Toledo accepted the advice of his ministers and backed down from his
    original requests (interview with Ferrero 2007).
Economic Technocrats in Peru                                                  103

clashes with the incumbent political parties, Perú Posible and APRA. Conflict
during Toledo’s term, for example, led to open debates in the media between
MEF experts and members of Perú Posible, including congressmen and an
aggressive vice president (Tanaka 2005, 30–31).
   This technical independence does not mean that policy decisions have always
conformed to the preferences of técnicos. As in Colombia, experts have had to
negotiate and sometimes accept limitations to their influence. For example, sev-
eral public sector salary increases Toledo promised during the 2001 campaign
were approved against the experts’ advice. Alan García also achieved some
exemptions from SNIP procedures for public works. Yet overall, MEF experts
have considerable control over macroeconomic policy and state expenditures,
which is a sharp contrast from the spiraling deficits and irresponsible spending
policies that prevailed during the 1980s. Thus, it is safe to say that, in general,
MEF technocrats have achieved high levels of technocratic autonomy from
politicians.
   A more disputed issue is whether the MEF is autonomous from business
interests. Some authors attribute experts’ considerable leverage in Peruvian
policy making to the power of business actors. For these authors, there is no
doubt that Peruvian reformers reconfigured business power in Peru in the
early nineties. Experts, aided by the crisis, dismantled the old economic model
and reduced the influence of the then-powerful business sectors that benefited
from it (Arce 2006; Durand 2006). However, there has since been less conflict
between the MEF and the “winners” of market reform, especially financial,
mining, and some export interests. This congruence has led political commen-
tators and some scholars to argue that these new private interests have cap-
tured state agencies and forced politicians to appoint experts who support
their interests. In this view, experts design policy and exercise their veto power
for the benefit of these business groups (Durand 2006, 203–204).
   For these authors, evidence of this capture is that experts are frequently
hired from the business sector and then return to it after their appointments
(Arce 2005; Durand 2006, 197–198). My research confirms that Peruvian
experts’ career paths are closely linked to private business, even more so than
in Colombia where more technical career alternatives exist in universities and
think tanks. With the exception of the Central Bank, and some think tanks (such
as Centro de Investigación de la Universidad del Pacífico (CIUP) or the Grupo
de Analisis para el Desarrollo (GRADE)), there are few job positions in Peru for
technocrats outside of state economic ministries and the private sector.
   Moreover, even experts recognize the capacity of these newly strength-
ened business groups to lobby for policy changes or oppose reforms they dis-
like (interviews with Boza 2007, Burneo 2007, and Waldo Mendoza 2010).
Pedro Pablo Kuczynski, who has held positions in investment banks, enter-
prise boards, and mining companies, regarded claims that these interests had
captured the state as exaggerated but agreed that the main weakness of eco-
nomic policy making in Peru is the state’s dependence on the private sector for
104                                     Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

qualified technical personnel. For example, when he tried to hire an expert in
foreign debt to negotiate pre-payments, he had to look to investment banks for
competent professionals (interview with Kuczynski 2007). The state did not
have officials with these skills, even in its more technical areas.
   Because market reforms were designed to benefit certain economic activi-
ties in accordance with técnicos’ wishes, certainly, overlap between the prefer-
ences of technocrats and these new business actors is expected. In a way, the
emergence of influential private sector actors demonstrates Peruvian experts’
triumph over the business interests that defeated them in the eighties: experts
changed the composition of businesses to fit their preferences. Yet, it is not
inconceivable that these new interests could have captured economy agencies.
However, if this were the case, we would not expect technocrats to contra-
dict the particular interests of these businesses. In fact, my research shows
that Peruvian economic experts do pursue policies against the wishes of these
groups, thus demonstrating their independence.
   First, macroeconomic policy making remains quite insulated and oriented
toward a free-market approach despite the opposition of some business sec-
tors. The continuation of market reforms is a result of technocratic, rather
than private sector, preferences. Evidence of this is that MEF decisions still take
business unawares, such as in 2007 and 2010 when the MEF reduced protec-
tive tariffs to the surprise of businesses (interview with Carranza 2010).
   Second, there are recent cases in which Peruvian technocrats have clashed
with business interests, showing that these predominantly harmonious rela-
tionships are not exempt from conflict. For example, experts have rejected
demands from powerful business actors, such as textile producers, to adopt
protective tariffs for their products.8 Additionally, Peruvian experts dur-
ing the last decade sought to extract revenues from economic activities that
benefited from market reforms. In particular, the tax authority, SUNAT, and
MEF adopted a financial tax in 2003 despite stiff resistance from banks. More
recently, these agencies have imposed a tax on stock market revenues, which
the financial sector strongly opposed.9 MEF experts also participated in the
negotiations between President Humala’s government and mining enterprises
to raise taxes on this sector. These negotiations produced a substantial increase
in revenue from mining companies.10 Another point of disagreement is infra-
structure projects such as ports and highways, which the MEF largely refuses
to fund even though these improvements are important to business interests
and are demanded constantly.
   Finally, Ollanta Humala, a candidate private sector elites strongly opposed
during the 2006 and 2011 campaigns, also appointed so called “pro-business”
technocrats to key economic positions. These included Humala’s first Minister
of Economics Luis Miguel Castilla, whose background is very similar to his

 8
     Gestión, “No Habrá Salvaguardias a Hilados de la India,” August 17th, 2009.
 9
     Gestión, “Ganacias en Bolsa Esta Vez Sí Pagarán Impuesto a la Renta,”August 21st, 2009.
10
     La República, “Así Se Negoció con Las Mineras,” August 28th, 2011.
Economic Technocrats in Peru                                                  105

predecessors. Humala’s choices demonstrate that technical appointments do not
occur simply because businesses have captured the state. As discussed later, cau-
tion and pressure from a variety of powerful actors, including businesses, politi-
cians, and IFIs, informally constrain presidents to appoint experts. As ­discussed
in my theory, the private sector is part of the explanation behind technical power
and continuity, particularly in Peru, but it is only part of the story.
   Thus, since 1990 economic technocrats have remained in charge of eco-
nomic policy in Peru. They were powerful not only under a non-democratic
government that insulated them from political pressure, but also during more
competitive democratic times, when their political superiors are weak, do not
possess congressional majorities, and do not necessarily have a deep com-
mitment to orthodox economic policy. Experts in the MEF enjoy significant
autonomy from politicians and business actors. In contrast to the situation of
the 1980s, when Team Dynamo failed to achieve its policy goals, technocrats
have managed to implement their macroeconomic preferences. What explains
this success?


Explaining Economic Technocratic Autonomy in Peru
The severity of Peru’s hyperinflationary crisis gave experts immense control
over the economy, which allowed them to take considerable steps toward
adopting their market reform preferences (Weyland 2002a, 198–199). For two
years, Peruvian experts enjoyed almost total control over economic policy. This
delegation of power allowed technocrats to increase expertise in MEF, trans-
form the state, and break down traditional sources of opposition to market
reforms, overriding any resistance from political or business interests. By doing
so, experts dramatically raised the technical level of policy making in eco-
nomic areas and created a more favorable environment for their own survival.
Because of this initial period, Peruvian technocrats did not need to be as stra-
tegic or invest as much energy in institution building as did their Colombian
counterparts in order to entrench their autonomy.
    When the crisis abated in 1993, experts lost some of their leverage.
Nonetheless, the four factors identified by my theory of technocratic auton-
omy favored technical continuity and entrenchment. From then until now, a
strong technocracy has remained in control of economic policy. In this section,
I first detail some of the experts’ strategies to build their autonomy and adjust
to the more competitive political environment following Fujimori’s fall. I then
explain how the four factors of my theory explain this outcome and highlight
some contrasts with the 1980s.

MEF Experts’ Strategic Actions
Throughout these two decades, experts strategically advanced their prefer-
ences and protected their autonomy. Experts were deliberate in systematically
advancing their goals, and these actions contributed to their growing control
106                              Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

over economic policy making. To begin with, knowing that they had a unique
opportunity to pursue market reforms even though politicians were not com-
mitted to them, experts rushed to implement these new policies (interview with
Du Bois 2007). MEF officials used international negotiations and the leverage of
IFI officials to break down domestic political resistance to reforms. Aware that
President Fujimori was not willing to reform the pension system, for example,
MEF experts asked IFI officials to stipulate those changes as part of their loan
conditionality (interviews with Du Bois 2007 and M. Ugarte 2006). To make
these changes irreversible, experts aimed to insulate parts of the state from pol-
iticians by creating new agencies or restructuring old ones. Besides increasing
their capacity and adapting them to the new market economy, experts provided
these institutions with formal protections against political pressures (Abusada
et al. 2000, 13–62; Wise 2003, ch. 6, Cortázar 2006, 16–50; interviews with
Álvarez Rodrich 2007, Escaffi 2007, Salazar 2007, Távara 2007, and Boza
2007).
    When the crisis eased in 1993, experts became more strategic. Since 1993,
experts have worried about patronage demands from politicians. With a domi-
nant party in power, experts received informal protection and political support
for their proposals. At the same time, however, Fujimori and his political allies
also threatened technical autonomy, since there was no opposition party strong
enough to resist them. Experts in the MEF realized that without an ongoing crisis,
they needed new strategies to prevent political interventions into policy making
(interview with Du Bois 2007). One of these strategies included opening an office
in Congress so that economic experts could quickly coordinate with legislators.
The office also collected information about economic proposals in Congress so
that experts could take preemptive actions against such bills if necessary.
    These strategic actions became even more important after the fall of Fujimori’s
government in 2000. With several parties sharing power in Congress, the expe-
rience of the eighties raised significant concerns within the MEF about politi-
cal intervention. Nonetheless, experts adjusted well to competitive democracy.
Expertise became a key resource for diverting political and socioeconomic
pressures and advancing technocrats’ preferred economic policies in this new
political environment.
    The MEF took preemptive actions to limit political intrusion in economic
policy. To deal with a fragmented legislature, transition minister Silva Ruete
strengthened the MEF’s office of parliamentary coordination to maintain
close relations with political groups and gather information about legislation
under discussion in more than twenty congressional committees (interviews
with Cáceres 2007 and Nakasone 2007). If a bill that the MEF opposed came
onto a committee’s agenda, this office would provide information and techni-
cal analysis to prevent its approval. If Congress still approved the project, the
MEF would try to convince the president to veto the law. Similarly, the MEF
consistently opposed congressmen’s efforts to include special budget items tar-
geting funds at their constituencies.
Economic Technocrats in Peru                                                  107

   A similar preemptive strategy was also used against other sectors of the
executive branch, especially ministries that spent funds in social issues, infra-
structure and so forth. All projects coming before the Council of Ministers first
went through a council of vice ministers. The MEF frequently used this pre-
liminary stage to learn what policies the other ministries sought to implement
and, if necessary, to oppose them (interviews with Nakasone 2007 and Vásquez
2007). The MEF, then, has developed a strategy to block measures of which
experts disapprove.
   MEF officials also coordinate with other actors to advance their proposals,
sometimes even against the interests of the incumbent. During Toledo’s adminis-
tration, experts frequently cooperated with members of APRA, the most vocifer-
ous opposition party, which was regarded within the MEF as a more structured
ally that had longer time horizons than did the disorganized Perú Posible (inter-
views with Cáceres 2007, Zavala 2007 and Zamalloa 2007). Under the APRA
government, the rightist party Unidad Nacional worked closely with the MEF
on several issues (interview with Lombardi 2008 and Morón 2013).
   Off the record, two former high-ranking MEF officials said that experts
frequently went to the press as strategy to deflect political threats. Bills that
would clearly increase the budget or benefit a special interest group were ana-
lyzed in the ministry and, when necessary, leaked to the press. The MEF used
this strategy, for example, to push for the reform of a costly pension law (Law
20530) that provided expansive retirement benefits to high officials, including
members of Congress from the incumbent party.
   Nevertheless, as in the Colombian case, experts’ strategies do not fully explain
this outcome. Politicians restrained themselves from intruding in experts’ work,
and several powerful actors made it very clear that they demanded technical
continuity in the MEF. Furthermore, even if debates about the economy remain
acrimonious, few economists question the basic aspects of macroeconomic pol-
icy and the benefits of an outward-oriented development model. There was less
opportunity for abrupt expert replacement. In clear contrast to health policy
or economic policy during the eighties, Peruvian experts since the nineties, like
their Colombian counterparts, have enjoyed favorable conditions to obtain
and entrench autonomy. What were these conditions?


Determinants of Technical Entrenchment in the MEF
Although, as mentioned, economic policy is already a favorable area for
­technical autonomy, the four factors my theory identifies as advantageous
 to technocratic autonomy explain why experts successfully established inde-
 pendence beginning in the nineties. Due to the economic crisis, three of those
 ­factors had higher scores than were present in the past, with the complexity of
  economic policy remaining fairly constant since the eighties.
     The two politics of policy factors scored high. First, as mentioned, the eco-
  nomic crisis and its disastrous consequences for Alan García showed politicians,
108                                   Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

especially the incumbent, the negative political consequences of poor economic
performance. Incumbents learned that fiscal equilibrium and good economic
outcomes were important for their interests. Additionally, the population
became sensitive to signs of economic irresponsibility, and a significant num-
ber of citizens started demanding economic moderation. The crisis came up
repeatedly in my interviews with experts and politicians as something that
“no ­quieres repetir” (“you do not want to do again”). Actually, two former
presidents of the Council of Ministers used this same phrase to describe why
appointing experts to signal responsible economic management is important
(interviews with Ferrero 2007 and Del Castillo 2007). As such, politicians are
well aware of the high risks of making mistakes in economic policy.
    Certain examples throughout these years show politicians’ worries about
the consequences of politicizing economic policy. Despite Fujimori’s popu-
list turn during his later years in office as he sought his second reelection, he
was aware that inflation and bad economic indicators would negatively affect
his popularity, especially since part of his political capital came from having
solved the economic crisis. As a result, once reelected in 2000, he brought back
Economy Minister Boloña in an effort to show his commitment to responsible
economic management through technical continuity.
    Fujimori’s successors have had even less room for irresponsible economic
management, as they lacked similar economic credibility. Presidents Paniagua,
Toledo, García, and Humala have all bowed to technocracy in order to subdue
fears of irresponsible policy making. In the cases of García and Humala, this
fear was especially high due to the uncertainties in the international economy
following the 2008 financial crisis. All these presidents presented their minis-
terial picks as credible commitments of economic responsibility both in front
of the population and stakeholders. As mentioned in the introduction, Toledo
complained about technocrats frequently, but continued appointing them to
the MEF. His commitment to technical continuity was already more firmly
established, since he had campaigned in 2000 against Fujimori while promis-
ing to maintain the economic model. During his first term, he appointed Pedro
Pablo Kuczynski to establish his commitment to technical and economic con-
tinuity. As discussed later, García and Humala made similar picks in order to
leave no doubts about their commitment to technical continuity.
    The potential consequences are visible when presidents do not clearly sig-
nal that they plan to continue with existing economic policy. An example
that shows this fear of reprisal from citizens and organized stakeholders was
Paniagua’s appointment of Javier Silva Ruete, a reputed technocrat, as minister
of economy. In his inauguration speech, Paniagua announced before Congress
his commitment to economic stability. However, he included an ambigu-
ous phrase that his government would “analyze the structure of our foreign
debt” and “negotiate multilaterally to adjust these payments” accordingly.11

11
     Mensaje del Presidente Constitucional del Perú Valentín Paniagua Corazao November 22nd,
     2000. http://www.congreso.gob.pe/museo/mensajes/Mensaje-2000-2.pdf
Economic Technocrats in Peru                                                              109

The declaration was perceived as a potential sign of instability. Stakeholders
voiced their concerns immediately, demanding more precise information about
this policy. Two days later, Silva Ruete appeared on a radio show to address
these concerns, clarifying that the president’s words by no means indicated a
change in Peru’s relationship with IFIs.12 This evaluation of foreign debt never
occurred.
    The extent that higher awareness of the political costs of poor economic
policy limits political intrusion should not be overstated. Individual politicians,
especially in Congress, continue demanding patronage resources that experts
still must keep in check, showing that “political learning” alone does not
explain technical stability (interview with Zavala 2007 and Carranza 2010).
Even so, greater awareness of the costs of poor economic outcomes certainly
contributes to increased technical autonomy.
    Second, a more balanced constellation of powerful stakeholders developed
during the nineties. IFIs and business interests closely monitor economic policy
and perceive experts as a safeguard against irresponsible policy making. These
stakeholders follow economic appointments in the MEF. Business associations
have become more sensitive to the costs of politicized economic policy (inter-
view with Morales 2007), which limits the incumbent’s control over economic
policy making. Even industrialists, who are frequently strong critics of MEF
technocrats (“no se ensucian los zapatos”) and their neoliberal policies, recog-
nize that technical management is preferable to political abuse of the economy
(interview with Farah 2007).
    This close vigilance can be seen in moments of ministerial replacement. These
episodes highlight how once experts have gained prestige, stakeholders ranging
from the political opposition, to businesses and IFIs, reinforce the demand for
preserving technocracy and preventing politicization. In the Peruvian case, the
fear of a return to the politicized economic policy of the eighties elevated these
concerns.
    The importance of stakeholders became clear during the days after Boloña
was fired in 1993. Stakeholders made their opposition to political appoint-
ments in the MEF very clear. Press reports from those days show how the
presence of experts had become a guarantee against this outcome. Business
associations, IFIs, and even political leaders demanded that Fujimori clearly
signal his commitment to economic continuity.13 El Comercio, the most influ-
ential newspaper in the country, demanded that technocrats continue to man-
age economic policy through the MEF in order to guarantee stability.14
    Similarly, Paniagua, Toledo, García, and especially Humala were also
informally pressured by stakeholders to appoint technocrats in the MEF and

12
     El Comercio, “Se Reducirá el Presupuesto en Donde Sea Posible,” November 25th, 2000.
13
     El Comercio, “Cotización de la Deuda Peruana Cayó con la Renuncia de Boloña,” January 6th,
     1993; “Se Afectó Limpieza de Moras con el BM y el FMI por Renuncia de Boloña,” January
     8th, 1993.
14
     El Comercio, “Editorial,” January 6th, 1993.
110                                     Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

maintain economic stability. These presidents lacked Fujimori’s economic
­credibility among these stakeholders and thus had to earn their trust by main-
 taining prudent economic policy. Both García and Humala appointed former
 MEF vice ministers in an effort to signal credibility to stakeholders. Former
 populist Alan García responded to stakeholders’ worries of a second economic
 disaster by appointing a highly reputed técnico – Luis Carranza – as eco-
 nomic minister.15 A former vice finance minister and then investment banker,
 Carranza provided the signal García required to show he had broken with his
 first government’s policies. The government presented the appointment as a
 commitment to economic stability (interview with Del Castillo 2007). Along
 with naming the minister of foreign affairs, Carranza’s appointment was one
 of the first announcements García made upon taking office, and it was posi-
 tively received by diverse stakeholders including IFIs, external investors, and
 business actors.16
     For his part, Humala reappointed the central bank president to his post and
 promoted APRA’s vice minister of finance, Luis Miguel Castilla, to head the
 MEF. These moves served to assure stakeholders of Humala’s commitment to
 maintaining economic policy, given that Castilla was clearly aligned with the
 demands of business interests and IFIs. As in the case of García’s first minis-
 ter, stakeholders reacted positively to the decision, voicing their support in the
 media.17
     Castilla has become a symbol of economic stability and a guarantee that
 Humala will not return to the left-leaning economic proposals he espoused
 during the 2006 and early 2011 campaigns. The director of one of Peru’s most
 important business magazines described Castilla as the only effective “guaran-
 tee” against Humala’s populist tendencies.18 The minister has remained in his
 position for more than two years, which is the longest tenure for an economy
 minister since Camet in the nineties. Every time rumors surface that Castilla
 may resign because of a conflict within the executive branch, or simply because
 of exhaustion, the press voices the demands of powerful stakeholders that he,
 too, respond. Since taking office, Castilla has had to deny his resignation at
 least four times in order to squash rumors and calm stakeholders.
     The short tenure of Víctor Joy Way in 1999 shows how stakeholders react
 to nontechnical appointments. Analysts, the political opposition, and some

15
     Bloomberg Report, “Peruvian Bonds Climb to Nine-Week High on Carranza Appointment,” July
     21st, 2006. Similarly, The Financial Times, “Garcia’s Choice of Finance Minister Cherished,”
     July 21st, 2006.
16
     Gestión, “Alan García Oficializó Nombramiento de Luis Carranza Como Ministro de Economía,
     July 21st, 2006; Gestión, “Banca de Inversión y Standard and Poor’s Saludan Decisión,” July
     21st, 2006; Gestión, “Empresarios Confían en que el Nuevo Ministro Mantendrá en Orden
     Cuentas Fiscales,” July 21st, 2006.
17
     La República, “CONFIEP y ADEX Confían en Crecer,” July 23rd, 2011.
18
     Semana Económica, Editor’s Opinion, “El Garante Castilla y la Precaria Confianza,” June
     24th, 2013.
Economic Technocrats in Peru                                                               111

sectors of the business community all criticized Joy Way’s politically driven
nomination.19 To counteract these criticisms, Joy Way quickly tried to signal
his commitment to technical policy making. He announced that he had hired
international consultant Jeffrey Sachs as his adviser, although Sachs actually
took part in only a few meetings, and presented a group of prestigious local
economists as part of his new economic team.20 However, these signs were
insufficient in the context of an international crisis, and Fujimori soon dis-
missed Joy Way as conditions abroad worsened.
    In addition, technical aspects of policy factors also ranked high in Peru,
thereby contributing to technical continuity and entrenchment. The complex-
ity of economic policy explains both why politicians delegated so much con-
trol over economic policy during the crisis and then had difficulty recovering
it after the crisis receded. As discussed, the sophistication of economic policy
in times of crisis explains politicians’ willingness to surrender it entirely to
experts. Lacking expertise in economics, most politicians have had little ability
to design and implement reforms, which they instead leave to technocrats.
    From then on, experts insisted that policy making comply with higher tech-
nical standards, thus tilting the playing field in their favor. The MEF’s reports
to Congress are written in a technical language, usually highlighting the costs
of legislative bills. For example, supporters of reforming Law 20530 used
highly technical evaluations from the MEF to show the allegedly high costs
of the existing pension system. Furthermore, SNIP requires technical evalua-
tions to assess the cost and sustainability of investment projects. Thus, tech-
nical complexity increases experts’ leverage over political and socioeconomic
actors in Peru.
    Lastly, the technical consensus about what constitutes adequate economic
policy was considerably higher in the nineties than it was in the eighties. The
hyperinflationary crisis conclusively discredited “heterodoxy” and other pop-
ulist alternatives to “prudent” economic policy. Economists now agreed that
economic stability and low inflation must be cornerstones of economic policy
(Leiteritz 2010, 137–138). This stronger consensus can be seen in the oppo-
sition to experts’ policies. Although leftist economists question the prevailing
market model, often severely, they now are significantly more moderate and
have much more in common with their neoliberal counterparts than they did
during the eighties (Leiteritz 2010, 133–134).


19
     El Comercio, “Ante los Cambios del MEF Empresarios y Analistas Coinciden en Exigir que
     no Se Opte por Medidad Populistas,” 6th January 1999. La República, “Oposición: Será un
     Gabinete Electorero,” January 4th, 1999.
20
     La República, “Joy Way Asegura que Política Económica No Será Modificada,” January 7th,
     1999, and “Joy Way Anuncia al Súper Equipo,” January 7th, 1999; Gestión “Se Mantiene el
     Modelo,” January 7th, 1999. El Comercio, “El Economista Jeffrey Sachs Asesorará al Ministro
     Joy Way,” September 1st, 1999, and “Joy Way Presentó a Su Nuevo Equipo de Asesores
     Económicos,” January 10th, 1999.
112                             Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

   Government plans demonstrate such a growing consensus around
­ acroeconomic policy. The economic proposals of the anti-market candidate
m
in 2006 and 2011, Ollanta Humala, were more similar to the dominant para-
digm than the heterodox proposals of the eighties (Partido Nacionalista 2006;
Gana Perú 2011). The diversity of technical viewpoints, then, significantly
shrank after the crisis and the consensus that emerged has remained strong
(interviews with Burneo 2007 and Morón 2007).
   In conclusion, the total delegation of power into the hands of experts in
1990, experts’ careful maneuvering, and the suitable conditions in economic
policy thereafter allowed experts to entrench their autonomy. For more than
two decades, these conditions have remained favorable, thus raising the likeli-
hood of technical continuity.


Conclusion
This chapter shows how Peruvian economic experts failed to achieve their
goals in the eighties but subsequently rose and successfully entrenched after
1990. The change of conditions between decades explains this variation. The
hyperinflationary collapse gave experts considerable power, enabling them to
control economic policy, and silenced critics of their market-based approach,
facilitating the emergence of expert consensus. Additionally, a more balanced
constellation of stakeholders emerged in the country while politicians became
more aware of the costs of delivering poor policy outcomes. Stakeholders such
as business, IFIs, and the political opposition, came to see management by
experts as preferable to leaving politicians in charge of economic policy. As a
result, economic experts became autonomous actors in Peru.
   These episodes reinforce the conclusions of the Colombian case. Expertise is
the most important resource for economists in order to make politicians more
dependent on them and to insulate their policies from political actors, business
groups, and IFIs. Apart from the context factors, these cases confirm the rele-
vance of the two technical aspects of policy factors. The technical complexity
of economic policy increases the importance of expertise and limits external
intrusion. The relevance of expert consensus for technical autonomy, present in
Colombia since the sixties and in Peru since the nineties, is also confirmed. At
the same time, the first Peruvian case shows how the lack of such a consensus
can harm experts.
   Some contrasts between the country cases also offer valuable informa-
tion. Under non-crisis conditions in Colombia, experts made slower pro-
gress and faced greater challenges achieving autonomy. The dramatic crisis in
Peru allowed neoliberal experts to quickly take control of economic policy.
Colombian technocrats’ strategies required more negotiation and institution
building, possibly because the more deliberate pace of entrenching expertise
made technocrats more concerned with institution building. With the excep-
tion of the Central Bank, economic experts in Peru have not adopted similar
Economic Technocrats in Peru                                                 113

strategies to foster new generations of technocrats and thereby institutionalize
technical control. Although there are some prestigious research institutes in
civil society, such as the Centro de Investigación de la Universidad del Pacífico
(CIUP) or the Grupo de Analisis para el Desarrollo (GRADE), such spaces are
less prevalent than in Colombia.
   The lack of this conscious institution building means the Peruvian technoc-
racy lacks similar institutional support outside the state, which makes these
experts more dependent on private sector future employment. Such proximity
may be costly for technical expertise in the event of a crisis. Other actors can
more easily question their legitimacy as technocrats, who in general would be
associated with particular interests. In sum, Colombian experts seem better
insulated to resist political and economic crises due to their conscious process
of institution building that limits their proximity to business.
   Additionally important, President Fujimori provided Peruvian experts
significant insulation that increased their leverage. However, while técnicos’
benefitted from the protection of a hegemonic leader, they also faced chal-
lenges arising from the president’s reelection objectives. In more competitive
democratic conditions, Peruvian experts have learned to act strategically and
preemptively to maintain their autonomy, perhaps losing some of their leverage
but gaining more independence from incumbents. As the Colombian case con-
firms, a strong political opposition constitutes one more relevant stakeholder
that provides more space to economic experts and limits the incumbents’ intru-
sion in economic policy making. In some policy areas, in which there are no
strong stakeholders, the only guarantee of technical continuity may be political
pluralism, which, as seen in the Colombian case, may not be enough.
   The contrast between these economic cases and the following health pol-
icy cases allow me to further highlight the importance of the causal factors
identified in my theory of technical autonomy. While health experts have also
achieved significant autonomy from politicians, the less favorable conditions
found in this policy area limit their degree of independence and make their
successful entrenchment difficult. Technical aspects of policy factors, and
more importantly, politics of policy factors, explain this strong divergence. As
Chapters 6 and 7 show, health policy experts remain more vulnerable than
economic técnicos.
6

Health Technocrats in Colombia
(1966–1970; 1993–2013)




Health policy experts in Colombia achieved autonomy in two periods of the
last sixty years. The first occurred under the National Front (NF) (1958–1974),
when health policy experts conducted an ambitious modernization and expan-
sion of the country’s health care system. This reform effort reached its pinnacle
under Health Minister Antonio Ordóñez, who served during the administration
of President Carlos Lleras (1966–1970). However, conditions were not favor-
able for entrenching technical autonomy. Following the NF period, experts lost
control of the health care system to politicians, who exploited it for patronage.
Low scores in each of my theory’s four factors show why health policy experts
could not withstand this political intrusion.
   The second period of autonomy started in 1993, when Minister of Health
Juan Luis Londoño and his “Team Change” implemented a drastic overhaul of
the health care system (González-Rossetti and Ramírez 2000; Ramírez 2004).
Although experts lost some leverage after Londoño left the ministry, they
remained influential either as ministerial advisers or in special offices within
the ministry. More recently, during the government of Juan Manuel Santos
(2010–2014), experts regained salience with three prestigious technocrats
occupying ministerial positions. Even if not as stable as the economic technoc-
racy, health policy experts have achieved continuity in Colombia and technical
appointments are now expected in the Ministry of Health.
   I explain the emergence of long-term technical autonomy in the less likely
area of health policy with high scores in three of my factors. These scores rose
in the decades between reform episodes, accounting for experts’ entrenchment
in the nineties but not in the seventies. Both “politics of policy” factors were
clearly stronger in the second episode. First, enrolling most of the population
in a single public system that has considerable financial problems made health
policy a much more salient political issue, and the cost of poor policy perfor-
mance rose. As a result, politicians needed experts to manage health policy in


114
Health Technocrats in Colombia                                                  115

order to promote better performance. Second, a more balanced constellation
of stakeholders emerged around health policy. On the international front, IFIs
and other actors became increasingly interested in health policy reform during
the nineties. Domestically, the reform itself created new stakeholders by foster-
ing new groups of health care insurers and providers. The cross-pressures of
these actors granted experts greater space in which to develop their autonomy.
Together, greater political interest in effective health policy and a wider range
of stakeholders explain a considerable degree of experts’ increased influence in
Colombian health policy.
   Furthermore, higher policy complexity, one of the technical aspects of policy
factors in my theory, also contributed to this outcome. Health policy became
more complex in the nineties, due both to the emergence of health economics
and the intricacy of the new Colombian health care system. Because politicians
were unable to fully understand these more sophisticated policies, it became
more risky to remove the technocrats who had designed them and who under-
stand the system.
   The chapter proceeds as follows. In the first section I use my theory of tech-
nocratic autonomy to explain technocrats’ failure to entrench at the end of the
NF. Next, I focus on the second health episode, providing evidence of experts’
autonomy and their continuity in the Ministry of Health after the reform. In
the third section, I detail experts’ strategies to advance their goals in this intri-
cate policy area and use my theory to explain experts’ considerable stability. I
conclude with some lessons derived from these two contrasting episodes.


Health Experts during the National Front
As discussed in Chapter 4, one of the NF’s main goals was reducing poverty
in Colombia (Hartlyn 1988; Dix 1967, 147). International reports produced
before the NF period had pointed to health problems and the weakness of
the health care system as direct causes of the country’s underdevelopment
(Sandilands 1990, 159–177; Ministerio de Salud, DNP 1990, 120–139; Abel
1996). The resource-starved health care system was also patronage-based:
resources, facilities, personnel, and medicines were distributed according to
political loyalty rather than to need (interview with Urrutia 2008). At the time,
the Instituto de Seguridad Social (ISS) and other specialized insurance pro-
grams focused on urban, formally employed workers, while the Ministry of
Health was responsible for the rest of the population. The NF leaders aimed
to professionalize, decentralize, and depoliticize the health care system (Lleras
Restrepo 1965; interview with Otto Morales Benites 2006).
   During these years, the government paid considerable attention to health
policy planning (Bradbury 1975, 6). The Ministry of Health was staffed with
teams of medical planners and epidemiologists. As in other Latin American
countries, these officials were mostly doctors, but in Colombia, they were
116                             Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

also competent in public health and proposed a comprehensive health care
system (USAID 1974, 18; Ministerio de Salud, DNP 1990, 148). These doc-
tors included renowned experts in public health such as Luis Carlos Ochoa,
Héctor Abad Gómez, David Bersh, Santiago Renjifo, and Francisco Yepes. All
of them were part of international epistemic communities with connections to
the United States, Chile, and Venezuela. These experts embraced modern doc-
trines promoted by the PAHO and other institutions that emphasized preven-
tive measures to fight disease, rejecting dominant paradigms in Latin America
at the time that focused exclusively on treating illnesses (Ministerio de Salud,
DNP 1990, 139–144; interview with Ordóñez 2006).
   NF governments increased health care expenditures in the country consid-
erably. Although precise statistics about health care expenditures are difficult
to find, a Fedesarrollo study shows that the ministry’s per capita health care
expenses increased by more than 250 percent over the NF period from 1966
to 1974 (Vivas et al. 1988, 286). Another study carried out by USAID shows
a similar trend: health care spending rose from 1.8 percent of GDP in 1961 to
roughly 3 percent in 1970 (USAID 1974, 149).
   A variety of ambitious reforms accompanied these spending increases. In
1960, the Ministry successfully lobbied Congress to approve two legislative
decrees (Decretos 1423 and 322 of 1960) that together established compre-
hensive health policies for the country (USAID 1974). Later, the second NF
government (1962–1966) focused on health care in the countryside, training
health promoters in rural communities in preventive medicine (Ministerio
de Salud, DNP 1990, 150). Furthermore, various master plans aimed to pro-
vide guidelines for distributing resources and developing health care facilities
(USAID 1974, 22–23). These plans focused on reducing political bargaining
and electoral benefits as the criteria for resource allocation. A central goal of
these reforms was to staff the health care system with a competent technical
bureaucracy insulated from electoral pressures (interview with Ordóñez 2006).
The government subsidized public health programs in national universities in
an effort to raise the number and quality of health care professionals (Ordoñez
1968, 16).
   These reform efforts peaked during the government of Carlos Lleras (1966–
1970). Lleras appointed Antonio Ordóñez, an internationally recognized health
expert and former PAHO official, as minister of health. Ordóñez brought with
him a group of highly qualified experts to implement his ambitious reform
plans (Ordóñez 1991; interviews with Ordóñez 2006 and Otto Morales
Benites 2006). The team designed a national health plan (Plan Nacional de
Salud 1968–1977) based on five priorities: developing health policy, evaluating
and supervising decentralized health facilities, training personnel, encouraging
more domestic health research, and creating a technical, non-politicized budget
for the sector. These reform efforts were helped by a constitutional amendment
in 1968 that gave the Ministry more regulatory power over the health system
(DNP 1974, 31–33).
Health Technocrats in Colombia                                               117

   Ordóñez and his team reorganized both the administrative and regional
apparatuses of the health system (DNP 1974, 23; Ordóñez 1991, 47). These
reforms sought, among other goals, to relocate medical personnel to rural areas.
Following his predecessors, Ordóñez also designed a plan to build health care
facilities according to regional needs (Plan Hospitalario. Construcción, dot-
ación, y operación de hospitales para el trienio 1970–1972, Law 39 of 1969).
In addition, the Ministry launched vaccination and family planning campaigns
while promoting the development of sewage systems (DNP 1974, 23). National
investment in sewage infrastructure grew by more than 300 percent from 1965
to 1970 (DNP 1974, 77; interview with Ordóñez 2006).
   These technical trends reversed after the end of the NF. Although the first
post-NF government, led by conservative Misael Pastrana (1970–1974), con-
tinued these reforms, renewed electoral competition between liberals and con-
servatives in 1974 led health policy and the health bureaucracy to once again
be used for clientelism (Ordóñez 1991, 47; Interview with Ordóñez 2006).
   Paradoxically, this political intervention was partly brought about by the
técnicos’ relative success. Because the health care system was underfinanced
before the reform episode, politicians saw few benefits from intervening in the
health sector. Certainly, the health care system was used for clientelism, but it
did not represent a substantial pool of resources. Because of the reforms during
the NF, the health care system was better funded and had a greater national
reach (Ordóñez 1991, 47; interview with Ordóñez 2006). Political competition
also pushed politicians to reassert control over health policy. In 1970, former
dictator Gustavo Rojas Pinilla from the opposition party ANAPO almost won
the presidency. Facing this political threat, the incumbent had a strong incen-
tive to directly manage health sector funds and social programs that could be
used clientelistically in order to undermine support, which was especially high
among the urban poor, for ANAPO. As a result, the nascent health technocracy
declined.
   What made health policy experts less resilient to political intrusion than
were economic technocrats in the NPD or MF during those same years? The
two factors related to the politics of policy in my theory that discourage polit-
icization score low in this episode and explain much of this outcome.
   First, as discussed in Chapter three, the political costs of poor health policy
performance were low but, with the return of inter-party competition, poten-
tial gains from political intervention were considerable. According to Minister
Ordóñez, reforms made the health care system a lucrative source of clientelism
across regions and municipalities (interview with Ordóñez 2006). Politicians
realized that they could use the system to their advantage with few conse-
quences because the politically influential middle and upper classes were largely
immune to the effects of intervention. These higher income groups were cov-
ered by the ISS, special insurance systems (Cajas de Compensación Familiar),
or private insurers (USAID 1974, 19–20). Turning health care into a patronage-
based system was attractive for politicians and incurred little political cost.
118                              Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

    Second, no balanced constellation of stakeholders existed within the sector
to protect the experts’ autonomy. Liberals and conservatives did not check one
anothers’ control in this policy area, as they did in economic policy, because
both enjoyed the spoils of clientelism at all levels of the system. The users of
the public health care network, mostly the poor, lacked leverage while, as
mentioned, other sectors of society had minimal interest in health policy. On
top of this domestic imbalance, international financial and aid agencies chose
largely to ignore this policy area. A 1974 study concluded that Colombia
received little foreign aid for health care. Although organizations like PAHO,
UNICEF, USAID, and a few private foundations were the most involved in
Colombia (USAID 1974, 153), they did not possess the same leverage as IFIs
did in economic policy. As a result, no stakeholders kept in check the power
of political actors who exploited the system to their advantage. This exploi-
tation, particularly at the regional level, robbed experts of initiative and was
one of the main reasons the reforms did not continue after the sixties (Abel
1996, 140). In sum, the health sector was an attractive, unguarded supply of
clientelistic resources that politicians gladly captured, leaving little space for
technical autonomy.
    Furthermore, the two factors related to the technical aspects of health pol-
icy were also minimally present. With respect to technical complexity, health
policy at that time focused on distributing resources, which politicians could
easily understand and dispute. Creating new positions in regional hospitals and
building health care facilities or other infrastructure works such as sewer sys-
tems were all distributable goods that national and local politicians perceived
as politically useful. The NF governments, for example, authorized the building
of a hospital for a small town (El Libano in the Tolima region) where there
was no technical reason for a facility of that size. Yet motivated by electoral
interests, politicians insisted the investment was important to the development
of the town and region (interview with Ordóñez 2006).
    In addition, there was little technical consensus on health policy. As in other
Latin American countries, divisions among health experts, especially between
those prioritizing prevention and others focusing on treating disease, made
reaching an agreement about adequate policies difficult (Ministerio de Salud,
DNP 1990, 154). The result was that the experts’ prescriptions were contested,
meaning that politicians could appoint officials more in line with their clien-
telistic preferences.
    Despite the intent of early reformists, the system did not experience drastic
changes in its scope, coverage, or capacity. More importantly for this book, the
Ministry remained technically weak. In the following years, Colombia’s health
ministry resembled others in the region: poorly funded, guided by prestigious
doctors linked to political parties but largely without health policy credentials,
and overburdened by its regulatory and health provision duties. By 1991, still
only 20Â€percent of the population was covered by some form of social secu-
rity, mostly the middle and upper classes by ISS (Ramírez 2004, 128). The rest
Health Technocrats in Colombia                                                             119

of the population depended on public facilities managed by the Ministry of
Health, which were quite difficult for the poorest citizens to reach.


Ley 100 and “Team Change” (1993–2013)
As in the previous episodes, experts arrived at the Ministry of Health in 1993
to confront a challenge that politicians were unable to resolve. President César
Gaviria (1990–1994) appointed a team of health policy technocrats, acting as
advisers to the Minister of Health, to push an ambitious health policy reform
through Congress. This reform was one of, if not the most, comprehensive
transformations of a national health care system in the history of Latin America
(Nelson 2004, 49; Ramírez 2004; González-Rossetti and Ramírez 2000).1 The
adoption and ensuing implementation of this reform plan are clear evidence
of experts’ autonomy. Although they lost some leverage after Gaviria’s admin-
istration, técnicos have remained relevant actors in health policy and, more
recently, have regained saliency under a succession of three highly technical
health ministers. In this section, I document these outcomes as well as provide
evidence of experts’ autonomy. In the next section, I use my theory to explain
how technocrats achieved autonomy.
    The 1993 health policy reform occurred as part of a wider set of political
and social reforms adopted in the 1991 Constitution. A growing crisis fueled by
corruption, internal warfare, and drug violence led to a national debate about
how to strengthen democracy in Colombia. President Gaviria embraced the
demands for reform and supported the election of a Constituent Assembly in
1990. For various reasons, reformists from traditional parties and new politi-
cal organizations, such as the recently demobilized leftist guerrilla group M-19,
ended up dominating the assembly (Falleti 2010, 135–139). Some of these
reformist assembly members pushed to include ambitious social rights in the
constitution to re-legitimize the political system (Ramírez 2004: 126–127; Falleti
2010, 138–139). At the same time, Gaviria’s government and other assembly
members sought to institutionalize market reforms in the Constitution. These
included so-called second generation reforms, such as overhauling social pol-
icy (health and education) and the justice system (Edwards and Steiner 2008;
Cepeda Ulloa 1994), that IFIs had recently begun encouraging.
    In this way, two different reform agendas overlapped in the assembly: a
social-progressive project and a neoliberal one. These two positions emerged
in the debates about the constitutional articles regarding health policy. On one
hand, some representatives of the ISS, medical associations, and health care
workers’ unions demanded a single health care system led by the state and
based on equity. On the other hand, members of the government proposed a

1
    For a comprehensive analysis of the debates, adoption, and implementation of the reform, see
    González-Rossetti and Ramírez 2000. Also see the Health Ministry’s document “Recuento del
    Diseño y Trámite de la Reforma en Seguridad Social en Salud” (Ministerio de Salud 1994).
120                              Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

system that promoted efficiency and market competition with more private
sector participation (Ramírez 2004, 128–129; Uribe 2004, 206–207).
    The final articles (48 and 49 of the 1991 Constitution) were a compromise
between expanding health care coverage through the state and efficiency by
involving market forces. The Constitution mandated that, in a year, the gov-
ernment had to present bills to Congress detailing the content of these consti-
tutional articles. Before adjourning, the assembly established a commission,
including social and state actors involved in the health care system, with far-
reaching powers to debate social policy laws, including health.
    The members of the commission remained divided between these two camps.
NPD technocrats representing the government, proposed a law that promoted
private participation in all areas, including insurance, as well as other poverty-
reduction policies following recent IFI proposals. On the other hand, medical
associations and experts from the ISS who embraced a primary health care
approach proposed state-centered reform, which limited private participation
in health care provision (Ramírez 2004, 129; González-Rossetti and Ramírez
2000, 37–43). These actors denounced the NPD’s proposal as abandoning the
equity-enhancing and social content of the 1991 Constitution (Ramírez 2004,
129; interview with Giedion 2008). To make matters more complicated, the
health ministry took a third position. Shortly after the assembly, Gaviria had
invited the M-19 into the government coalition to lead reform in the Ministry
of Health. Although the Ministry did not officially take sides in the debate,
its positions were closer to the ISS than to the NPD (interview with Paredes
2008).
    As a result, the government never presented a unified health policy reform
proposal, and debate stagnated. Partly due to these impasses, M-19 left the
government in November of 1992. Gaviria took the opportunity to change the
leadership of the Ministry of Labor, Ministry of Health, and ISS to achieve a
unified reform team capable of pushing forward social security reforms. Gaviria
appointed Juan Luis Londoño, who had a PhD in development economics with
intensive training in health policy economics, as his health minister. Prior to
this appointment, Londoño was a deputy director at the NPD, where he had
advanced the aforementioned proposal.
    Once in the ministry, Londoño appointed a group of técnicos as his advis-
ers that the press dubbed “Team Change” (Equipo Cambio). This team was
recruited from NPD officials working on social policy and others who had
recently received postgraduate degrees in public health (González-Rossetti and
Ramírez 2000; interview with Paredes 2008). With ups and downs, this reform
team eventually acquired a considerable presence, and then autonomy, within
the Ministry.
    To push through reforms, Londoño and his team undertook a broad,
participatory process to determine the content of the new law. This process
included consultations with government officials, regional authorities, the
Colombian Medical Federation, private health institutions, and other groups
Health Technocrats in Colombia                                                            121

(Ramírez 2004, 132; interview with Paredes 2008). The Ministry took these
­consultations seriously, amending its original stance to include equity consid-
 erations and eventually producing a proposal that gained acceptance among
 more sectors than did previous reform efforts. The draft consisted of broad,
 general principles, leaving the details for the implementation stage (González
 and Ramírez 2000, 50–51). With the crucial backing of President Gaviria, Ley
 100 (Law 100) was finally approved in December of 1993. The government
 tied health reform to the overhaul of social security and was thus able to pass
 both simultaneously (González-Rossetti and Ramírez 2000).
    The resulting Ley 100 places all citizens into a single health care system
 but with two tiers or regimes based on ability to pay.2 The contribution-based
 regime, including the formally employed sector and independent workers
 with sufficient income, allows beneficiaries to choose from health plans (Plan
 Obligatorio de Salud, POS) offered by private insurance companies called
 Health Promoting Enterprises (Empresas Promotoras de Salud, EPS). The state
 collects a payroll tax from workers to then pay EPSs, which in turn contract
 service providers, both private and public, which are collectively called Health
 Service Providers (Instituciones Prestadoras de Servicios, IPS). Colombians
 without sufficient income, as determined by the DNP, are covered under the
 subsidized regime, which has the same structure as the contribution-based
 regime. Part of the fee paid by those in the contribution-based regime funds the
 subsidized system while the government supplied the difference (Escobar et al.
 2009, 5). The two regimes offer different levels of coverage, with the subsidized
 system focusing on the basic services recommended by selective health care
 strategies and the contribution-based regime providing a more comprehensive
 package.
    The system attempts to address both the equity and efficiency concerns
 raised during the debate surrounding the 1991 Constitution. Although it began
 with two unequal tiers, Ley 100 expanded basic health care coverage and man-
 dated that, by 2001, both systems converge so that all citizens would enjoy
 the benefits of the contribution-based regime. At the same time, by working
 through private insurers, as well as a mix of public and private service provid-
 ers, the law sought to encourage competition that would produce efficiency
 gains over the old system of providing supply-side subsidies to public hospitals
 (Escobar et al. 2009, 4–6).
    If approving the reform demonstrated experts’ leverage and saliency, the
 events after the reform solidified this impression. Experts successfully imple-
 mented many reforms quickly and under stressful conditions. Several factors
 made the already daunting task of transforming the health care system more
 difficult. First, the reforms required harmonization with political decentraliza-
 tion that the new constitution also initiated. The Constitution and some laws,

2
    For a more detailed explanation of this complex system see Ramírez 2004, 134–136; González-
    Rossetti and Ramírez 2000, 32–35; Uribe 2004, 197–201.
122                              Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

both old and new (e.g., Ley 10 of 1990), transferred a myriad of ­responsibilities
to regions and municipalities, among them regulation of healthcare, financing,
and provision. Experts faced the challenge of coordinating subnational govern-
ments to carry out these functions, which were critical to the success of the new
system, especially to its subsidized component.
   Londoño and his team also worried that whoever won the 1994 presidential
elections would either reverse Ley 100 or halt its implementation. This concern
was well grounded. The candidate of the incumbent liberals and favorite to
win the election, Ernesto Samper, came from the party’s social democratic wing
that was often in conflict with Gaviria’s more neoliberal faction. Samper clearly
articulated his opposition to expanding the private sector’s role in health care.
When he became the liberal party’s presidential nominee, the team knew they
had limited time to implement the reforms (interview with Paredes 2008).
   Experts abandoned their earlier consultative strategy for a closed, secre-
tive process to implement the law. Team Change worked frantically over six
months to entrench the reform. Although experts attempted to vet these pol-
icies through a new National Council for Social Security in Health (Consejo
Nacional de Seguridad Social en Salud), an institution that included repre-
sentatives from all parties involved in health policy and was responsible for
regulating the system according to Ley 100, this body lacked the capacity to
effectively supervise experts. Londoño and his team passed twenty-five decrees
in a mere seven months (González-Rossetti and Ramírez 2000, 50–53; Ramírez
2004; interviews with Giedion 2008 and Paredes 2008). Reform opponents
argued that Team Change selectively read the law, making the system much
more privately oriented than originally intended, while members of the team
claimed that they were simply following Ley 100 (González-Rossetti and
Ramírez 2000, 50–51).
   Knowing that these regulations were easily reversed, especially because of
the general language of Ley 100, Team Change prioritized creating the new
institutions included in the law. Experts believed that these institutions would
generate new stakeholders that could oppose a reversal in the system (González-
Rossetti and Ramírez 2000, 50–53). These stakeholders included the agencies
in charge of purchasing health care services, EPSs in the contribution-based
regime, and Administradoras de Régimen Subsidiado in the subsidized regime.
Health policy technocrats also adopted new regulations for health care provid-
ers, both private and public.
   Experts also aimed to maintain technical continuity in the ministry after the
change of government. Knowing that the complexity of the reform exceeded
the capacities of the ministerial bureaucracy, Londoño tried to build technical
groups that could work with some independence inside the ministry. Starting
in 1994, a team of experts dubbed “the Harvard Group,” named for the con-
sulting support they received from the Harvard School of Public Health, was
charged with designing a plan to provide technical support to reforms in the
following years. This group produced what is known as “The Harvard Report”
Health Technocrats in Colombia                                                     123

(Colombia Health Sector Reform Project 1996), which included a blueprint for
implementing the reform.
   The Harvard Report proposed using a foreign loan to hire an internationally
reputed academic institution to provide technical assistance and oversee imple-
mentation (interviews with Castaño 2008 and Ramírez 2009). This plan was
never realized due to opposition within the Ministry of Finance, which found
such a loan too costly. Nonetheless, government funds and an IDB loan for
$65 million (U.S. million) allowed for the creation of a special office, Programa
de Apoyo a la Reforma en Salud (PARS), to support the implementation pro-
cess. Starting in 1996, PARS took over some of the responsibilities identified
in the Harvard Report with Nelcy Paredes, Londoño’s right hand during the
initial reform period, as its first director.3
   When Samper won the 1994 election, he appointed a doctor and well-known
reform opponent as Minister of Health. This minister brought his own team of
experts, who came largely from the ISS and had opposed the NPD’s proposals
during the early reform debates (Ramírez 2004, 139, Uribe 2004, 208). The
new minister delayed implementing further reforms and reversed some regula-
tions, especially those concerning demand-side subsidies for public hospitals.
The new regulations restored abundant subsidies for public health care provid-
ers and forced EPSs in the subsidized system to contract a percentage of ser-
vices from these facilities. These changes were at odds with the original design
that had aimed to promote efficiency by making public facilities compete with
private service providers (interview with Ramírez 2009). However, the min-
ister left after one year and Samper’s ensuing ministers, as well as those of
his successor conservative Andrés Pastrana (1998–2002), were generally more
sympathetic to the reform agenda (interviews with Galán Sarmiento 2009 and
Paredes 2008). Nonetheless, provider subsidies remained in place.
   In 2002, President Álvaro Uribe reappointed Juan Luis Londoño to invigo-
rate the reform process, especially with regard to expanding health care cov-
erage. Reform had encountered fiscal problems due to the 1999 international
financial crisis, judicial decisions that required the state to purchase medicines
and medical services not included in the original POS, and difficulties brought
on by health decentralization (Uribe 2004, 104; interviews with Uribe 2008,
Santa María 2008 and Pinto 2009). Londoño brought back several members of
Team Change as well as new healthcare specialists. He also proposed merging
the labor and health ministries into a single “Ministry of Social Protection,”
which Congress approved that year.
   When Londoño died in a plane crash shortly after taking office, Uribe
appointed Diego Palacio, a member of Team Change but not a credentialed
expert, to head the ministry. Palacio retained several members of Londoño’s
team and remained in office until the end of Uribe’s second term in 2010

3
    PARS reports and publications are found in minproteccionsocial.gov.co/salud/Paginas/
    Programa%20PARS.aspx
124                                     Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

(interview with Pinto 2009). Palacio focused on expanding health care
coverage, which grew astronomically from around 60 percent in 2002 to
90 percent in 2010, but paid less attention to controlling the system’s growing
deficit (interviews with Zapata 2011, Ramírez 2009, Giedion 2008, and A.
Gaviria 2008). According to information from the Ministry of Health, 92 per-
cent of Colombians now enjoy some form of health care coverage within the
system: 49 percent in the subsidized regime, and 43 percent in the contributive
regime. The rest are either in special systems or not affiliated. Additionally, in
response to the growing complexity of the system, the ministry created the
position of technical vice minister (interview with Ramírez 2009).
   The end of Uribe’s administration was marked by a severe financial crisis
in the health sector that resulted from the aforementioned problems but also
from new rulings by the Constitutional Court that placed additional stress on
the system (Clavijo and Peña 2010; Fedesarrollo 2009; 2010). The government
declared the system to be in a state of emergency and issued executive decrees
in response, although the Constitutional Court later reversed them (Clavijo
and Peña 2010). This crisis eventually led to an increase in technocratic auton-
omy in the ministry.
   Because of these growing problems, health policy gained public salience.
Several critical voices even demanded a reversal of the 1993 reform. President
Juan Manuel Santos (2010–), Uribe’s successor, appointed Mauricio Santa
María, a widely recognized expert who was a deputy director at the NPD and
then at Fedesarrollo, as Minister of Social Protection to tackle the system’s
serious fiscal problems. Santa María had long worked on the financial prob-
lems of social policies in Colombia and warned of the disastrous consequences
of growing deficits. The new minister appointed qualified experts to address
the immediate crisis and establish a sound, long-term fiscal base for the sys-
tem (interviews with Zapata 2011 and Reyes Forero 2012). To confront these
financial problems, the team enacted major reforms, which included decou-
pling the Ministry of Labor and the Ministry of Health.
   In December 2011, Santos announced that Santa María would become
NPD director and Beatriz Londoño, Santa María’s technical vice minister and
a highly reputed expert, Minister of Health. These moves guaranteed high
technical continuity in the ministry. More recently, in August 2012, Alejandro
Gaviria, a widely respected social policy expert who was Dean of Economics of
Los Andes and one of the harshest critics of the financial crisis in the health sec-
tor, became Santos’s third Minister of Health. All these ministers have pushed
for reforms, some quite controversial and drastic, to address the system’s seri-
ous budget problems.4 As I write, Colombia’s health care system remains an
important political issue.

4
    El Tiempo, “La Gente Ya No Tendrá que Afiliarse a una EPS: Alejandro Gaviria,” February 25th,
    2013; El Tiempo, “Gobierno Acepta Ajustes, pero Defiende Continuidad de Reforma de Salud,”
    November 5th, 2013.
Health Technocrats in Colombia                                                 125

    In conclusion, health policy technocrats were more successful than their
1960s counterparts at achieving considerable autonomy and continuity
within the Ministry of Health. After Londoño left the government in 1994,
experts remained relevant actors either as advisers in the Ministry’s office, in
special offices crated to give technical support to the ministry (PARS), and
more recently again in the top positions of the Ministry such as the techni-
cal vice ministry. However, these successes have accompanied failures that
reveal the limits of experts’ autonomy. PARS, for example, provided a safe
place from which to maintain some technical autonomy in the ministry, but
it lacked control over the reform process and could not directly implement
its own recommendations (interviews with Ramírez 2009 and Pinto 2009).
In addition, even if technical appointments to head state institutions are now
more common, few would conclude that this is an entrenched pattern in
Colombia. Health policy experts in this period enjoyed more autonomy than
during the NF or at any point in time in Peru, but less independence than
did the economic experts discussed in previous chapters. What explains this
intermediate outcome?


Explaining Technical Autonomy and Continuity in an
Unlikely Policy Area
In this section, I will first discuss how experts’ actions helped build a moder-
ate amount of autonomy and then how medium scores in three factors of my
theory explain this outcome in what constitutes a “less-likely case” for tech-
nical independence. These three factors are (1) elevated political costs of poor
policy performance, (2) a somewhat balanced constellation of stakeholders,
and (3) a rise in health policy complexity. The first two “politics of policy” fac-
tors increased politicians’ need to appoint experts and limited intrusion into
health policy. The last factor, related to the technical aspects of policy, contrib-
uted to limiting political intrusion by making health policy less comprehensible
for politicians, thereby complicating politicians’ assessment of the potential
costs of intervention. The remaining factor, technical consensus, remained low.
Although recent decades have seen a global consensus emerge around health
policy, debates about what constitutes adequate health policy in Colombia
have continued since the early nineties.
   As in the previous two chapters, this episode shows how expertise provided
technocrats with considerable leverage over other actors. In a reform process
that became increasingly technical, experts gained control over the policy con-
tent of the reform. Londoño and his team were firmly backed by a reformist
president, providing them with an advantage not enjoyed by experts in some
of the other episodes I discuss. Yet their actions and strategies were also impor-
tant to achieving the reform and guaranteeing technical continuity (González-
Rossetti and Ramírez 2000, 66–79). This episode illustrates three types of
strategies through which experts built their own autonomy.
126                                Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

   The first of these strategies was purposively using their expertise, ­particularly
of health economics, to exclude opponents from the policymaking process and
overcome resistance from less well-trained individuals. As explained by a mem-
ber of Team Change interviewed by González-Rossetti and Ramírez:
I was asked to present the proposals to interest groups and congressmen who came to
discuss the proposals. … It was a strategy that facilitated the international support of
the process, as well. Finally, it was also a strategy for exclusion. People who did not
understand could not argue the main aspects of the reform. … And Juan Luis Londoño
did not face many technical arguments against the reform: probably the role played
by Fedesarrollo was one of the few important ones in that sense. Londoño only feared
Fedesarrollo’s arguments, he wanted to be sure the data were right when they had to
discuss [the data] with him.(González-Rossetti and Ramírez 2000, 75)

As discussed later, when analyzing the policy complexity factor identified in my
theory, the reform’s multifaceted regulations and its focus on economic aspects
of the health system, such as efficient resource distribution, made this strategy
more effective.
   A second strategy was to establish alliances with domestic and foreign
actors in order to advance the reform (Ramírez 2004, 131). Aware of IFI inter-
est in health policy reforms, experts sought these institutions’ support for both
reform and technical continuity in the ministry. The Harvard School of Public
Health provided abundant technical advice during the reform process, bringing
to Colombia some “of the best people working on health topics in the world”
(González-Rossetti and Ramírez 2000, 75). At the domestic level, the team
built horizontal and vertical alliances with other governmental agencies work-
ing on reforms, such as the NPD, the MF, and technical teams in the ISS and
the Ministry of Labor (González-Rossetti and Ramírez 2000, 66–72). These
technical networks within the Colombian state facilitated coordination to pass
the reforms.
   Lastly, experts sought to entrench expertise in health policy by creating semi-
autonomous offices within the ministry. The Harvard Team (1994–1996) and
then PARS (1996–2008) worked in the ministry but were not part of the min-
isterial bureaucracy. These offices remained quite autonomous, independently
receiving and managing external funds. Harvard’s School of Public Health also
contributed to experts’ continuity, as members of the team carried out stud-
ies at Harvard during or after Londoño’s first term. As discussed later, experts
also inadvertently contributed to their own stability by rushing to create new
institutions within the health care system. Although their goal was to entrench
the reform, these institutions ended up increasing the need for expertise in the
sector.
   Nonetheless, experts’ strategies alone do not explain this intermediate out-
come. As discussed in the next chapter, Peruvian experts were also quite strate-
gic but failed to achieve similar continuity. The conditions in this episode were
unusually favorable for experts working in health policy.
Health Technocrats in Colombia                                                127

Politics of Policy Factors
In the first health episode, NF politicians were able to exploit the health care
system because it was not of immediate concern for many Colombians, espe-
cially in the more vocal middle and upper classes. After the 1993 reform, the
cost of poor policy performance became considerably higher and solving
health policy problems became much more urgent for the incumbent. This
higher cost came from expanding coverage of the public health care system.
More important for increasing this political cost than just numbers is the fact
that middle and upper class interests in the contribution-based system, which
served 43 percent of the population in 2012, are now entangled with poor
Colombians in the subsidized system. Although the two regimes are largely
separate (only a small percentage of the contribution-based fund is shared with
the subsidized regime, for example), any crisis affecting the Ministry of Health
puts both groups at risk.
   However, the costs of poor policy performance were not immediately evi-
dent for politicians after the reforms were passed and only became appar-
ent as problems surfaced. As described earlier, several issues, largely related to
poor allocation of resources and a growing deficit, plagued the reform follow-
ing its adoption. In these first years, politicians again profited from a better
funded health system. A significant percentage of resources were transferred
to regions and municipalities where they were frequently used for clientelistic
ends, such as creating additional patronage positions in public facilities, or sim-
ply lost to corruption (interviews with Santa María 2008 and Paredes 2008).
From an average of 1.2 percent of GDP in the eighties, the system grew to
around 3.6 percent of GDP in 1998, of which local governments spent around
70 percent.
   But clientelism and corruption were not the only problems. Maintaining sub-
sidies for public facilities led to an increase in health care expenditures, since
the government was now subsidizing both health care providers and consumers
because of the failure to enforce competition. Additionally, the number of med-
ical procedures authorized in the contribution-based and subsidized systems
grew as citizens used administrative or judicial rulings to demand that the gov-
ernment pay for more procedures (Escobar et al. 2009; Glassman et al. 2009;
Ramírez 2004, 136–137; interviews with Cepeda 2006, Santa María 2008 and
Zapata 2011). In 2008, new Constitutional Court decisions put the system
under even more stress by significantly expanding health care expenditures.
   As a result of these processes, the health care system nearly suffered finan-
cial collapse with important repercussions among the public (interview with
Reyes Forero 2012). President Uribe faced strong public criticism for what
was perceived as inaction regarding the health care system. Opponents of the
1993 reform, including health experts, reemerged and blamed the crisis on
private health organizations, especially EPSs. Uribe approved an emergency
decree to cut some of this deficit, but the Constitutional Court declared it
128                                    Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

unconstitutional. All these events put the health care crisis at the center of
­public debate.
    It is difficult to measure this growing public concern. One indicator is the
 considerable attention that health policy gained in the press. A search for the
 terms “salud” (health) and “POS” (Programa Obligatorio de Salud) in El
 Tiempo, Colombia’s most widely read newspaper, yielded fewer than 15,000
 results in the decade before 2006. The number of results for the same search
 in 2007 jumped to 19,394, then 30,549 in 2008, 30,626 in 2009, and 28,693
 in 2010 (an election year).5 Additionally, in clear contrast to the recent past
 when security issues were the dominant concern of Colombians, social issues
 took center stage in the 2010 presidential election. According to a Gallup poll
 from April 2010, health care ranked second with 12 percent of respondents
 identifying it as the most acute problem in Colombia, after unemployment
 (39 percent).6 As mentioned, Juan Manuel Santos, Uribe’s successor, responded
 to these concerns by appointing experts respected for their knowledge of these
 financial problems to be his health ministers. Experts serve as public symbols
 of politicians’ commitment to addressing public concerns.
    This growing cost of poor policy performance and the potential consequences
 of the system collapsing opened more space for expert autonomy and increased
 technocrats’ leverage in the health sector. It was now clear to politicians that
 there was less tolerance for poor policy performance. Colombia’s health care
 system is still in crisis and is currently one of the most highly contested issues
 in the country.7 This political cost becomes more daunting for politicians when
 paired with the growing complexity of health policy. The intricacy of the health
 care system raises the technical level needed to understand the effects of policy
 decisions, giving experts more space to exercise their autonomy. In conclusion,
 this higher political cost and the potential consequences of a full-blown crisis
 boost expert autonomy.
    Second, a more balanced constellation of stakeholders emerged in health
 policy, providing experts with more space to act autonomously. This con-
 stellation was first enhanced by the growing interest of IFIs in health policy
 reform during the nineties. As mentioned, members of Team Change were part
 of international epistemic communities, because many of them were working
 or had worked for IFIs (González-Rossetti and Ramírez 2000, 60–62). The
 neoliberal reforms advanced by Gaviria included issues such as health policy
 and judicial reform about which IFIs had recently begun advising, as part of
 what they called “second generation reforms.” Politicians were aware of this


5
    El Tiempo, archivo electrónico. http://www.eltiempo.com/seccion_archivo/index.php
6
    Semana, “¿Cuáles Son los Temas que Llaman a Votar en Estas Elecciones?” Online edi-
    tion. April 29th, 2010. http://www.semana.com/politica/cuales-temas-llamaran-votar-estas-
    ­elecciones/138254-3.aspx
7
     El Tiempo, “Pese a Algunos Avances, la Salud en Colombia Todavía Sigue en Crisis,” January
     23rd, 2012.
Health Technocrats in Colombia                                                                   129

growing interest, reinforcing the need to appoint experts in these areas who
could act as interlocutors of IFIs.
   Although IFIs had limited involvement in Colombian health policy prior to
1993 (Uribe 2004, 108), the reform process increased their presence in this pol-
icy area. The WB and the IDB supported the reform in many ways, such as by
providing funds to offer competitive salaries to some members of the technical
team working on special projects during the reform period. Additionally, as
mentioned, another foreign institution, the Harvard School of Public Health,
provided support from 1993 to 1996 (Ramírez 2004, 138). By becoming
involved in reforms, IFIs created a more balanced constellation of interests
around health policy and thereby increased expert autonomy.
   As discussed in the next chapter, IFI interest in health policy reform had
diminished by the end of the nineties. While the withdrawal of international
agencies in Peru tipped the balance of stakeholders away from reform, by
the time this happened in Colombia, other domestic actors had emerged that
were powerful enough to counterbalance other influential interests. Insurers
and providers now had a stake in keeping experts in the system in order to
limit political appetites and curtail other stakeholders’ influence. These actors
exerted themselves through two associations that defended private interests
in the system. The Colombian Association of Health Purchaser Companies
(Asociación Colombiana de Empresas de Medicina Integral, ACEMI) lobbied
for all EPSs in the public and private systems,8 while the Association of Health
Providers (Asociación Colombiana de Hospitales y Clínicas, ACHC) included
both private and public facilities.
   Private health insurers and providers now have stronger interests in public
health policy that makes them exercise checks on other actors, precisely as the
system’s designers intended (Londoño and Frenk 1997). ACEMI, for exam-
ple, produces frequent opinions about health policies.9 Similarly, the ACHC
exerts its influence on the government and other actors of the system, such as
health purchasers.10 Given the costs of the current system for the private sector,
even the powerful Association of Financial Institutions (Asociación Nacional
de Instituciones Financieras, ANIF) voices frequent technical opinions about
the costs and limitations of the health care system (ANIF 2008; 2009; 2010).
These mutual checks and balances allow experts to exercise their autonomy.
   Critics of the reform highlight the power of these private actors to shape
policy in their favor. The fact that some health experts involved in the reform
now work in these associations only reinforces the image of a cozy relationship


 8
     See, for example, the frequent press releases produced in response to policies during the current
     health crisis: http://www.acemi.org.co/index.php/es/comunicados
 9
     See, for example, the frequent press releases produced in response to policies during the current
     health crisis: http://www.acemi.org.co/index.php/es/comunicados
10
     For an example of technical reports and research produced by ACHC, as well as press releases,
     see: http://www.achc.org.co/investigaciones.php?idcat=28
130                                     Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

between experts and private institutions. Yet overall, these relations do not
signify that experts are subordinate to the private sector. Experts’ ­preferences
frequently conflict with the interests of private actors. Especially in recent
years, experts have sought to put tighter controls on these institutions, spe-
cifically health insurance. Currently, experts are pursuing more oversight of
EPSs because of allegations of corruption against them over the last several
years. These actions include financial sanctions and interventions in some of
these institutions, including some of the most powerful EPSs of the country.11
Similarly, experts have sought closer control over these private actors. The
regulatory agency that had originally intended to monitor these new private
actors, the Superintendencia de Salud, did not function as expected (interview
with Uribe 2008 and Reyes Forero 2012). Recently, this agency’s responsibility
to oversee health insurance was transferred to the powerful Superintendencia
Financiera. Experts argued that the Superintendencia Financiera, which is a
strong and respected government agency that effectively controls financial
institutions, is better suited for this task.
    Further, the idea that unified private interests have captured public policy
does not acknowledge the divisions that exist between these private interests.
There are several ongoing disagreements between insurers and providers,
especially about the immense debts EPSs (insurers) owe to IPSs (health care
providers) that are partially responsible for the system’s precarious financial
situation. Both sides have proposed solutions that the other strongly criticizes,
and insurers have even supported ministerial actions against providers. Thus
private actors in the health sector are at odds with one another and contrib-
ute to a more balanced constellation of stakeholders that, in turn, increases
experts’ autonomy.
    This constellation is still not as balanced and plural as in economic policy.
Some crucial actors such as associations of patients and civic groups are still
relatively weak (Ramírez 2004, 132). Also, as mentioned earlier, some of the
new institutions, such as the Superintendencia de Salud, have not functioned
as expected, thereby limiting pluralism. Similarly, the Health Council that was
supposed to oversee the system never gained institutional strength (Grupo de
Economía de la Salud 2007; Naranjo Velandia et al. 2002). The Council was
replaced in 2007 by a health commission with similar functions (Comisión de
Regulación en Salud, CRES), which itself has since been dissolved. Even so, the
reforms helped create powerful stakeholders that led to a more favorable envi-
ronment for expert autonomy.


Technical Aspects of Policy Factors
An increase in the complexity of health policy, one of the factors related to
the technical aspects of policy, also favored greater technical autonomy. As

11
     El Tiempo, “¿Por qué Renunció el ‘Defensor’ de las EPS?” June 3rd, 2011.
Health Technocrats in Colombia                                                131

discussed in Chapter 3, an increasing focus on economics in the late ­eighties
and early nineties made health policy more complex. The health econom-
ics approach emerged in response to the challenges of meeting health care
needs where resources are scarce. Health policy now required understanding
econometric models and complex statistics. Ley 100 included diverse technical
and financial aspects that only individuals with proper training in econom-
ics could fully grasp. Team Change was amply trained in this discipline: “The
group liked to talk based on numbers and graphs” (González-Rossetti and
Ramírez 2000, fn 85).
    Health policy complexity also grew because of the myriad institu-
tions involved in the Colombian health care system (Giedion et al. 2000).
Understanding the intricate network of new and old institutions and their rela-
tionships with each other is difficult even for experts accustomed to navigating
the system. To make matters worse, the system became even more complex
due to the decentralization reforms that multiplied the institutions involved in
health policy. Colombia has approximately 1,000 municipal and 32 regional
governments, which lacked technical expertise but were each responsible for
health policy in their jurisdiction.
    This complexity furthered politicians’ dependence on experts. These techni-
cal intricacies make it very difficult for new ministers to fully comprehend their
responsibilities and the potential problems the sector faces, which reinforce
their reliance on experts as advisers. According to former minister Augusto
Galán Sarmiento (1995–1996), health ministers need capable experts that can
understand the system and respond to its complex challenges (interview with
Galán Sarmiento 2009).
    Technical complexity also gave experts the upper hand when debating health
policy during and after the reforms. The majority of politicians, doctors, union
members, and other health experts lacked similar technical knowledge. As
discussed earlier, experts used this complexity to exclude nontechnical actors
from the reform process. Similarly, Teresa Tono, PARS Director from 2003
to 2008, mentioned that opponents of the reform frequently approached the
president or health minister to criticize the system. These criticisms were usu-
ally deflected by showing their lack of empirical support. While the Ministry
and PARS had abundant technical studies backing their positions, many crit-
ics based their arguments on anecdotal evidence (interview with Tono 2008).
Complexity, thus, contributed to experts’ autonomy and continuity.
    The fourth factor, expert consensus, however, remains low in Colombia.
Although there is growing agreement among experts about the need to focus
on resource allocation when debating health policy reform, the same divisions
debated during the 1991 Constituent Assembly persist today. Many health pol-
icy experts support the reform, but an important group of specialists from pub-
lic universities, doctors’ associations, and public hospitals remain quite critical
(Redondo and Guzmán 1999; Yepes et al. 2010). Reform opponents criticize
new private institutions, mainly health insurance, for not allowing for real
132                              Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

equity in the system and channeling disproportionate resources toward the
contribution-based regime. These experts accuse the technocrats who created
Ley 100 of following in the footsteps of traditional Colombian health officials,
with their narrow focus on curing illness, rather than on adopting a broader
preventive perspective (Yepes et al. 2010).
    These divisions among experts weaken technocrats’ power relative to poli-
ticians’ power because politicians can selectively appoint experts with views
more closely aligned with their own interests. This happened when Samper’s
first minister appointed the group of ISS experts who opposed the reform. At
the same time, politicians from the liberal party’s left wing and the new leftist
party, Polo Democrático, frequently used these experts’ ideas to criticize the
market legacies of Gaviria’s administration. These divisions became more prev-
alent recently when the health sector crisis brought the whole reform under
scrutiny. Some experts demanded an alternative, more state-centered approach
that could overcome many limitations of the current system (Yepes et al. 2010).
For now, supporters of maintaining the current health reforms remain in
charge, but these disagreements are still strong. Although the current Minister,
Alejandro Gaviria, favors the overall scheme of the reform, he is pushing for
some deeper changes to the system in order to guarantee its financial stability.
    Even so, it seems unlikely that politicians will drastically reduce the tech-
nical level involved in policy making: politicians need experts from one side
or the other in the Ministry. The three other factors leave less space for politi-
cians to significantly limit the role of expertise, as happened in Peru when IFIs
lost interest in health policy and politicians clashed with experts. Even if new
experts with stronger reform prescriptions enter government, they will almost
certainly have similar technical credentials to those of current experts. Given
the political environment in Colombia, the cost to the incumbent of not doing
so is potentially quite high.


Conclusion
These two episodes show that experts can gain autonomy even in unlikely pol-
icy areas such as health. In both episodes, experts enjoyed considerable lever-
age to adopt their preferred reforms and a good deal of independence from
politicians and other social actors. Health policy technocrats in the sixties built
up a public health system and their counterparts in the nineties achieved ambi-
tious reforms. Nonetheless, the low scores in all factors of my theory in the first
episode led to the demise of experts when open political competition returned
after the NF. This first episode highlights how vulnerable experts’ autonomy
can be within this social policy area.
    On the other hand, higher scores in my two “politics of policy factors” as
well as in technical complexity contributed to greater entrenchment in the
­second episode. Higher costs of poor policy performance, a more balanced
 constellation of stakeholders, and increased complexity all made experts
Health Technocrats in Colombia                                               133

integral to health policy, which forced politicians to keep experts in the state
and give experts more autonomy. These higher scores have persisted for the last
two decades and allowed experts to remain relevant in health policy during
that time. In sum, these two episodes lend support to my theory of technical
autonomy.
   What else can we learn from these episodes? First, as discussed in my the-
ory, politicians have incentives to intervene in the health sector and generally
encounter low political costs in doing so. Both episodes show the danger of
delivering more funds to state policy areas without considering this political
ambition. Policy makers should be aware that in some sectors of the state, such
as a decentralized health system, politicians’ considerable influence opens the
door for clientelism and corruption.
   In addition, the second episode shows how reforms themselves can enhance
the potential and real political costs of mismanaging a policy sector. By includ-
ing middle and upper classes in the health care system, the reforms made health
policy more relevant to a bigger and more vocal sector of the population. Exit
strategies were scarce for these well-off sectors, which meant they had incen-
tives to hold politicians accountable for poor health policy performance. As a
result, experts became more important for politicians.
   Similarly, this episode shows how policy reform itself can increase the num-
ber and importance of stakeholders within a policy sector, thereby indirectly
making technocratic autonomy more likely. Experts rushed to create institu-
tions to entrench the reform, which also fostered better conditions for their
own survival. These increased constellation of stakeholders help to explain the
persistence of technical autonomy even when IFIs lost some interest in health
policy reform at the end of the nineties. The contrast with the ensuing Peruvian
episode reinforces these conclusions.
7

Health Technocrats in Peru (1990–2002)




Health experts in Peru were appointed to the Ministry of Health (MINSA) dur-
ing Alberto Fujimori’s first administration (1990–1995). Fujimori’s first minister
of health hired experts to help him reform the health sector and attract external
loans from IFIs interested in health policy reform (Vidal 1994a). Even though
this minister was soon fired, some of the experts that he appointed remained
at MINSA until 1993, when they gained considerable autonomy. Specifically,
experts in the International Cooperation Office (Oficina de Cooperación
Externa, OCE) designed and pursued reforms that significantly changed the
health care system. Even if not as comprehensive as the Colombian reforms,
the changes OCE spearheaded were quite notable for a sector characterized by
immobility (Ewig 2004).
    Despite traditionally high turnover rates for ministers, directors, and advisers
in MINSA, experts in the OCE remained in their positions through seven min-
isterial terms during Fujimori’s administration (1990–2000). Nonetheless, this
technical group lacked the leverage to push forward more ambitious reforms,
limit political intervention in some instances, and ultimately to entrench its
autonomy in the Ministry of Health. After a series of political clashes and the
reduction of external funds, technical influence gradually weakened and lost
its relevance in 2001.
    Even though it proved to be only temporary, what explains the autonomy and
short-term stability of experts in this “less likely” policy area? What conditions
limited this autonomy in the Peruvian episode and made technocrats vulnerable
to dismissal when they clashed with politicians in the early 2000s? I argue that
medium scores in two of my theory’s factors were crucial for experts’ auton-
omy. First, the involvement of IFIs in health policy reform during the nineties
created a more balanced constellation of stakeholders in the health sector. This
external demand pushed politicians to appoint experts and give them more
autonomy. Second, the increasing prevalence of health economics made policy


134
Health Technocrats in Peru                                                                      135

in this area more complex, thereby limiting political intrusion. Nonetheless,
these favorable conditions did not suffice to permanently entrench technocratic
autonomy, especially when IFIs gradually lost interest in health policy reform
at the end of the decade. Although experts are now more present in MINSA
than they were in the eighties, this institution remains an area of low technical
autonomy.
   This chapter proceeds as follows. In the first section, I provide some back-
ground on the Peruvian health care system and briefly examine a failed reform
effort in the eighties that shows the challenges health reformers faced in Peru. In
the second section, I discuss the rise of experts within MINSA, provide evidence
of their significant autonomy, and detail the reasons behind their eventual dis-
missal. In the third section, the chapter’s core, I use my theory of technocratic
autonomy to explain both experts’ autonomy and their demise. Particularly,
I discuss how even though experts achieved significant stability in their posi-
tions, technocracy did not entrench and remained vulnerable to changes in
political preferences. In this episode, reforms did not create stakeholders with
interests in public health policy nor did they include middle and upper classes
in the system. I conclude by highlighting how this episode contrasts with the
more successful Colombian one.


The Health Ministry before the Reform
MINSA has always been a weak and underfinanced state institution, falling
very short of meeting its vast responsibilities.1 MINSA’s main duty is to oversee
the health care system, both public and private. However, MINSA also shares
responsibility for public health provision with the social security system for
the formally employed, formerly called the Peruvian Social Security Institute
(Instituto Peruano de Seguridad Social, IPSS), and now, Health Social Security
(Seguro Social de Salud, ESSALUD).2 MINSA facilities provide health care to
almost 75 percent of the population, mostly from the poorer sectors. Currently,
31.4 percent of Peruvians are covered by a subsidized public health insurance
(Seguro Integral de Salud (SIS), 24.3 percent by social security, 2.8 percent by
other special public systems, 1.5 percent by private providers, with around
40 percent still lacking insurance (ENAHO 2012; Chon et al. 2011; Petrera
and Seinfeld 2007). Even though poverty is more pervasive in rural areas, the
health system has traditionally been highly urban (Ewig 2010, 45–56, 108;


1
    For a historical overview of several problems in the Peruvian health sector, see Alvarado Pérez
    and Lenz 2006; Chon et al. 2011; Ewig 2004, 218–226; Francke 2001; MINSA 1996; and
    Petrera and Seinfeld 2007, ch.1.
2
    Since 2002, regions became legally responsible for the administration of health facilities in the
    country, reducing MINSA’s administrative duties. Regions gained control over these facilities
    gradually throughout the last decade.
136                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

Arroyo 2000, 91–123; interviews with Arias Stella 2007, García 2007, and
Tejada de Rivero 2007).
    Expertise has also been very low in the health sector. Traditionally, politically
connected doctors without a background in public health served as ­ministers
of health for very short terms (Arroyo 2000; interviews with Johnson 2007
and Sánchez Moreno 2007). By my count, only five of twenty-five ministers
from 1980 to 2013 had specialized training in public health. Ministerial turn-
over was very high, and the appointment of a new minister usually led to
other personnel changes in the ministry (interviews with León García 2007,
Vera 2007, and Pastor 2007). Apart from a period of stability during the nine-
ties, most directors and advisers in the ministry occupied their positions for
merely one ministerial term (Arroyo 2001, 50; interviews with García 2007
and Peña 2007). Significant changes in this policy area were very limited during
the eighties due to worsening economic conditions that drastically reduced the
sector’s budget and strong resistance from health unions to even minor reforms
(interviews with Arias Stella 2007, García 2007, and Pinillos 2007).
    An exception to this immobility was the failed reform effort of Alan García’s
first health minister, David Tejada (1985–1987). A lifetime member of APRA,
the incumbent party, Tejada was the most prestigious and influential health
policy expert in the country. At the time of his appointment, Tejada was dep-
uty director of the World Health Organization (WHO) and had helped orga-
nize the highly influential 1978 Alma Ata conference where WHO promoted
primary health care (Cueto 2004). García presented Tejada’s appointment as
evidence of his commitment to the health reforms urged by WHO (interview
with Arce 2007).
    Once in his position, Tejada assumed that he had the necessary political sup-
port to implement ambitious changes, especially when his proposals received
unanimous support in Congress (interview with Tejada de Rivero 2007). These
proposals involved a drastic decentralization of material and human resources
(Tejada de Rivero 1985). However, it seems that the government was not aware
of the implications of taking primary health care seriously. Directing resources
to rural areas was not popular among politicians or influential factions within
the Ministry and led to confrontations with unionized doctors, nurses, health
officials, and other health care experts (interviews with Arce 2007 and Tejada
de Rivero 2007).
    According to Tejada, another major impediment to his reform plan was
MINSA’s low level of expertise. The ministry lacked professional cadres that
could implement primary health care–oriented reforms. In a desperate effort
to compensate for this deficiency, Tejada himself started giving informal early
morning classes to his directors and advisers (interviews with Arce 2007 and
Tejada de Rivero 2007).
    Overwhelmed by the protests, and lacking support from politicians who
wanted to avoid clashes with unions and reform critics, Tejada left the ministry
in 1987. He was reappointed in May 1989, but unions would not even give
Health Technocrats in Peru                                                    137

him the benefit of the doubt. More strikes amid the economic crisis forced his
resignation only five months later. Tejada’s failed effort to reform the health
care system shows the severe challenges reformers faced at MINSA. Speaking
playfully about his experience as minister, Tejada told me that although he
knew many things about heath policy, he realized he would have needed an
MA in political science to deal with the political and particular interests in the
health sector.
   Conditions in the health care system became even worse by the end of the
decade (Vidal 1994a, 319–324). The economic crisis and political violence
damaged the health care network, especially in rural areas (Ewig 2004, 221;
interviews with Meloni 2007 and Luján 2007). Inflation reduced salaries to
pittances, forcing MINSA professionals to work in private practice in order to
make ends meet (Webb and Valencia 2006). Public hospitals implemented fees
to fend off resource shortages (Arroyo 2000, 59–62). Corruption skyrocketed
and the black market for medicine grew significantly (interviews with Espinoza
2007, Cubas 2007, and Meloni 2007). It was under these precarious condi-
tions that health experts arrived at MINSA.

The Emergence and Stability of Health Experts
(1990–2002)
In 1990, President Alberto Fujimori appointed Carlos Vidal as his first Minister
of Health. A doctor and former vice president of the Pan American Health
Organization (PAHO), Vidal recruited a cohort of young public health experts
to fill MINSA’s upper echelons. Many of these experts had MAs in public
health from the prestigious Universidad Cayetano Heredia and even more
had received technical training from PAHO or special programs supported by
the University of Alabama, Johns Hopkins University, and prestigious Latin
American institutions (Vidal 1994a, 316–317; Vidal 1994b, 345; interviews
with Cubas 2007, Gozzer 2007, and Meloni 2007). These young experts con-
trasted with the older bureaucratic cadres in charge of the Ministry during
APRA’s last months in power.
   Vidal’s ambitious reform plan aimed to decentralize the health care sys-
tem and increase preventive care (MINSA 1990). Technocrats appointed in the
International Cooperation Office (Oficina de Cooperación Externa, or OCE)
sought loans to increase the ministry’s limited budget and initiate reforms
(interview with Meloni 2007). These experts were aware of IFIs’ and bilateral
agencies’ growing interest in health policy reform and whose support was a
necessity with the ministerial budget under incredible stress (interview with
Cubas 2007). Vidal also appointed two highly reputed experts to lead spe-
cial programs for immunization and TB. Under severe constraints, the team
designed a five-year plan (Políticas y Plan de Salud 90–95) that proposed sig-
nificant changes to the Ministry, including merging it with the social security
institute to build a single national health system (MINSA, 90–95, 1990a).
138                             Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

    Nonetheless, this reform process came to an early halt when Vidal and
Fujimori clashed about the proper way to handle a cholera epidemic in January
1991 (Reyna and Zapata 1991). An anecdote shows these disagreements. Vidal
advised the population not to eat ceviche, a popular dish based on raw fish that
was suspected to be contaminated with the bacteria due to sewage runoff from
Lima. As a result, fishermen and some restaurant owners protested, alleging
that there was no evidence that raw fish transmitted cholera. Some ministers
showed their support for these protests by eating ceviche in public. Ultimately,
President Fujimori himself ate ceviche on television to tell the population that
it was perfectly safe, which undermined the credibility of his health minister
(Vidal 1994a, 332–339). In February, Vidal resigned along with part of his
team. However, other team members, such as personnel in the OCE and those
experts leading the previously mentioned special programs, remained in their
positions (interviews with Cubas 2007 and Meloni 2007).
    Técnicos’ expertise – and some fortunate events – allowed them to remain
influential actors in MINSA from 1991 to 1993 by becoming ministerial advis-
ers. After Vidal, Fujimori appointed Víctor Yamamoto, his sons’ pediatrician,
as minister. A doctor with no public health expertise, Yamamoto relied heavily
on experts’ advice to avoid mistakes (interviews with Espinoza 2007 and
Meloni 2007). Leadership of MINSA changed again in November 1991 when
Victor Paredes, a congressman from the incumbent party, was appointed min-
ister. Paredes was known for his opposition to Carlos Boloña and the MEF’s
neoliberal policies. This rivalry helped experts maintain influence in the minis-
try, as they became Paredes’ allies in opposition to the MEF’s proposed health
reforms.
    In fact, the same month of Paredes’s appointment, Boloña and MEF tech-
nocrats successfully pushed for a presidential decree enacting an ambitious
neoliberal health policy reform project (Legislative Decree 718). With the goal
of increasing efficiency and competition in the public health care system, the
project took steps toward privatizing health care provision in Peru. In line with
the Chilean health care reform model, the decree allowed workers to leave the
social security institute and join private health care insurance groups called
Organizaciones de Servicios de Salud (Weyland 2006, 185–188; Ewig 2010,
106–109). Experts in MINSA strongly disagreed with this reform due to what
they believed were excessively high social costs (Ewig 2004; interview with
Meloni 2007). Paredes used experts’ arguments to convince Fujimori that the
reform carried negative social and political consequences, leading to a delay in
its implementation.
    In August 1993, Congressman Jaime Freundt was appointed to head MINSA.
A proponent of neoliberal health policy reform in Congress, Freundt was
expected to support the MEF’s plan. Nonetheless, the policy remained shelved
(Weyland 2006, 187–188) and, surprisingly, Freundt retained some of Paredes’
advisers. It was during Freundt’s tenure that técnicos became powerful actors at
MINSA. Two factors explain this decisive expansion of technical autonomy.
Health Technocrats in Peru                                                                 139

   First, IFIs and bilateral aid agencies approved the loans negotiated in 1990
and 1991, pending some minor clarifications. These revisions required techni-
cal knowledge of similar reforms and the capacity to communicate with IFIs
on technical matters. The minister gave more resources to the OCE in order
to make these clarifications and assure the loans. According to the then-OCE
director, because the reforms needed a more technical approach and less rigid
administrative structure than the MINSA bureaucracy could provide, the deci-
sion to support experts in the OCE was mainly for efficiency’s sake (interview
with Meloni 2007),
   These loans were finally approved, and three externally funded projects
started that year (interview with Meloni 2007).3 One of the projects, funded by
the IDB and the Japanese cooperation agency (OECF), was used to strengthen
the OCE (Programa de Fortalecimiento de Servicios de Salud, PFSS). The OCE
administered this project and monitored two others that functioned as par-
allel bureaucracies within the ministry: the Programa de Salud y Nutrición
Básica (PSNB and Proyecto 2000), which were financed mostly by the WB and
USAID, respectively (Ewig 2010, 97–105; interviews with Meloni 2007 and
Gozzer 2007).
   A second factor that further contributed to experts’ autonomy was the start
of a new poverty alleviation campaign. With a stable economy and the Shining
Path in retreat, the government outlined a plan to reduce poverty and com-
pensate for the social costs of market reforms. The minister of economics pre-
sented the plan to creditors in the Paris Club, who approved it enthusiastically
due to its embrace of recent IFI proposals for human development (Ewig 2010,
80–81). As a result, in 1994, MINSA started a targeted program to provide a
basic health package to the poorest sectors of society (Programa Salud Básica
para Todos, PSBT), fully funded by the national budget (Ewig 2010, 97–100).
Designing and implementing PSBT also increased the need to hire experts in
MINSA.
   In what follows, I focus mostly on experts at the OCE, as this office became
a think tank for health reform and lent support to other reform initiatives.
However, there were other experts working in MINSA at the same time, some
of them quite independently from one another. Although the externally funded
programs were designed and initially supervised by the OCE, they eventually
gained considerable independence from the office. Additionally, other initia-
tives like PSBT, the immunization and TB programs, and efforts to delegate
the administration of medical posts to local communities, had special offices
within the ministry that only minimally coordinated with the OCE (Ortiz de
Zevallos et al. 1999; Ewig 1999: 508–509; Ewig 2004; interviews with Meloni
2007 and Vera 2007).


3
    The projects’ budgets amounted to 220 million dollars, out of which 152 million were foreign
    aid funds and the rest governmental funds (Ugarte and Monje 1999).
140                              Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

   This reform period was unique in Peru’s history. Never before had MINSA
had so many resources from foreign aid and so many health experts work-
ing in the ministry; as one official put it, the OCE was a “ministry within
the ministry” composed of an “army” of health experts (interview with Luján
2007). Although, in contrast to the comprehensive overhaul of the health care
system in Colombia, reforms were only “piecemeal” (Ewig 2004), they consti-
tuted unprecedented changes to Peruvian health care that were implemented
by autonomous experts within the ministry. What evidence is there that experts
were acting autonomously?
   First, experts successfully implemented reforms to advance their preference
for improving health care for the poor, especially in rural areas (similar reforms
to the ones that politicians had been unwilling to support in the 1980s). To do
so, experts deliberately shielded policy making, which allowed them to pursue
their reforms without attracting political attention. Técnicos used this insula-
tion to channel international and national resources toward providing selective
primary health care to vulnerable groups of the population, especially in rural
areas. Each project was directed toward these goals. The PSNB, for example,
targeted infant and maternal care while also training health officials. (Ewig
1999; 2004; 2010; Petrera y Seinfeld 2007, 79–84; Ugarte y Monje 1999, 575–
576). Proyecto 2000 started pilot projects in five poor regions of the country
and also provided training to health officials. Consequently, they reduced some
of the urban and middle class bias of the Peruvian health care system (Ewig
2010, 56–58).
   Additionally, experts privileged the creation of more primary care health
centers. The cornerstone for a decentralized health system was the construc-
tion of primary care centers in shanty towns and rural areas. PFSS used a con-
siderable portion of its funds to strengthen the health care network with new
facilities, buy modern equipment, and improve its administrative capacities
(interviews with Gozzer 2007 and Pedro Mendoza 2007). As seen in Table 7.1,
while the number of hospitals remained constant during that decade, there was
an explosion of new health care centers and primary care centers that clearly
shows this change in priorities (Ugarte and Monje 1999, 575).
   Additional evidence of autonomy is the fact that experts achieved consid-
erable continuity and stability in a ministry characterized by high ministerial
turnover, which was in turn accompanied by frequent personnel changes at
lower levels. After Vidal, Fujimori appointed seven health policy ministers dur-
ing the decade. Experts remained influential under all of them, even though, as
the next section details, their relations with ministers were not always peaceful.
However, their actions show that they were able to escape political control to
a considerable degree.
   Technocrats also were autonomous from IFIs, even though foreign resources
were critical for the development of this technical bureaucracy. Experts had
a close relationship with IFIs and followed some of these institutions’ rec-
ommendations for health policy reform, such as promoting efficiency and
Health Technocrats in Peru                                                      141

table 7.1. MINSA Health Infrastructure (1980–2002)

                          1980      1985     1990     1992      1996     2002
Hospitals                  114       123      130      148       136      138
Health centers             451       592      826      826      1028     1179
Primary care centers      1402      1776     2662     2958      4762     5415
Other                                                    2         7      111
Total                     1967      2491     3618     3934      5933     6843
Source: MINSA 2007.


targeting vulnerable groups. At the same time, Peruvian experts had their
own preferences that were not always consistent with IFI recommendations.
Técnicos’ preferences and policies also drew influence from the World Health
Organization (WHO), the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) and
the United Nations Population Fund (UNFP), institutions that lack the kind of
leverage attributed to IFIs. More importantly, there is no evidence of IFI coer-
cion in the adoption of experts’ reforms (Ewig 2010, 83).
   Although these health policy experts did achieve significant autonomy,
they were more limited in advancing their preferences and preventing politi-
cal interference than were economic technocrats and their counterparts in the
Colombian health sector since the 1990s. On the one hand, experts lacked the
leverage to achieve the more comprehensive reform they desired. On the other
hand, technocrats failed to resist political intervention in technical policies and
eventually lost their relevance in the ministry.
   Crucial evidence of OCE experts’ limited autonomy is their failure to
achieve comprehensive reform in line with their preferences. The document
Lineamientos de Política de Salud (1995–2000) contained a plan to fully over-
haul the health care system by balancing equity, efficiency, and quality (MINSA
1996; Arroyo 1999, 549; Arroyo 2001, 14). Several follow-up documents pro-
vided additional details for this proposal and developed a more precise diag-
nosis of the health care system (Mesa-Lago 1996; Espinoza 1998). The reform
mirrored several aspects of the Colombian health policy reform, including a
plan to provide subsidized health insurance for the poor. Equity was a princi-
ple guiding the reforms and, in comparison to MEF plans, the OCE’s propos-
als relied less heavily on market mechanisms for the health sector. Although
experts advocated for these reforms and gained the support of Minister
Eduardo Yong Motta (1994–1996), the plan was never implemented due to its
perceived political costs (Weyland 2006, 161, 191–192). The appointment of
a more neoliberal minister in 1996 meant that MINSA changed priorities and
shelved experts’ comprehensive proposal.
   Peruvian health policy experts also had difficulty limiting political interfer-
ence in their ongoing policies. Two episodes clearly show these limitations. As
just mentioned, in 1996 a new minister, Marino Costa Bauer, led a new effort
142                              Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

to privatize social security health care in a similar vein as the failed reform of
1991 (OSS). The minister hired a law firm to review the 1991 OSS project and
draft a new bill (Arroyo 1999, 14; Ewig 1999, 509–511). MEF experts sup-
ported the creation of private health care providers (Empresas Prestadoras de
Salud, EPS), which the MINSA technocracy once again opposed (Ewig 1999,
510). Nonetheless, contrary to experts’ preferences, the decree was finally
approved. Although Congress eventually reversed this decree and the incum-
bent approved a considerably less comprehensive law, the fact is that experts
were not able to block this reform. The proposal was watered down only
because of its perceived political costs (Weyland 2006, 193).
   A second political intervention occurred in July 1997 when President
Fujimori announced the creation of a free insurance program for students
(SEG). The president made the announcement during a message to the nation
without consulting MINSA. As a result, the minister of health had to imple-
ment this insurance plan hastily without proper evaluation (Jaramillo and
Parodi 2004; Arroyo 1999, 575; Ewig 2010, 112–114). Health policy experts
opposed SEG, because they did not consider students a particularly vulnera-
ble group. Limited resources, they argued, would be better spent on infant or
maternal care. However, the decision was politically very attractive because
it would benefit a broad section of the population with a comparatively low
cost due to students’ relative good health (Jaramillo and Parodi 2004, 16). In
1999, the ministry started a maternal and infant insurance program (Seguro
Materno-Infantil) while maintaining SEG.
   These political changes and clashes led to the gradual but steady decline of
technocratic influence. In August of 1999, vice minister of Health Alejandro
Aguinaga became minister. Aguinaga had been vice minister since 1994, dur-
ing which time he had clashed with the OCE (anonymous interviews with two
members of the OCE reform team). Due to his long tenure, Aguinaga under-
stood health policy and how the ministry worked, so experts had less leverage
over him.
   Resources also became scarce, partly due to IFIs’ diminishing interest in
health policy reform and partly due to the change of government. As men-
tioned in the previous chapter, IFI emphasis on social policy decreased by the
end of the decade. The IDB, for example, did not renew its loan for PFSS. OCE
started to seek funds for a new project called PARSALUD (Programa de Apoyo
a la Reforma de Salud), which would have allowed MINSA to adopt a more
comprehensive plan of public insurance for vulnerable sectors and maintain
high levels of expertise in the ministry. The loan consisted of $270 million (U.S.
million) from foreign donors, with additional money from the national budget.
The abrupt end of Fujimori’s government in 2000 caused international lenders
to reconsider these loans (MINSA 2001, 23) and, during the transition govern-
ment, the MEF opted not to pursue them for budgetary reasons. A smaller loan
of $88 million was finally approved that year for PARSALUD (interviews with
Meloni 2007 and Pretell 2007).
Health Technocrats in Peru                                                  143

    Additionally, the new administration restructured the OCE (MINSA 2001,
28). Some of the new authorities criticized the office, and the foreign aid proj-
ects in general, for developing parallel organizations in MINSA (“Islands of
Efficiency”) without using their resources to reinforce MINSA’s core bureau-
cratic capacities (MINSA 2001, 21–22; interviews with Pretell 2007 and Vera
2007). This shortage of resources, along with internal disputes among experts
concerning their participation in Fujimori’s reelection campaign, led to the
departure of several técnicos.
    The end of this health policy technocracy came under President Toledo’s
government in 2002 when Luis Solari (July 2001–January 2002), a doctor
and leading member of President Toledo’s political party, Perú Posible, was
appointed minister of health. A devout Catholic, Solari opposed several poli-
cies promoted by the ministry, especially family planning programs. According
to Solari, many experts who had worked in the ministry under Fujimori were
still in their positions when he reached the ministry. Solari accused them of
implementing abusive health policies, such as a controversial plan in which
patients were sterilized without proper consent. Similarly, in his opinion, they
were involved in corruption within the ministry (interview with Solari 2007).
Solari’s successor, Fernando Carbone (January 2002–June 2003), shared these
convictions and policy preferences. Diverse experts recall this “Catholic” period
as one when several experts left the ministry, affecting the continuity of ongo-
ing programs (interviews with Espinoza 2007, Luján 2007 and Meloni 2007).
Priorities, personnel, and policies were easily changed at MINSA.
    Since then, no similar technocracy has emerged at MINSA, although there
have been several more technically oriented ministers. In October 2008, Alan
García appointed a respected health policy expert, Óscar Ugarte, as minister
of health. His longer tenure (2008–2011) allowed for some policy continuity
and technical reinforcement of certain areas in the ministry. Ollanta Humala’s
second minister, Midori de Habich (2013–) is also a widely known expert and
has plans for ambitious reforms. Nonetheless, it is too early to tell if she and
her reform team will gain continuity and achieve significant autonomy.
    In conclusion, experts made meaningful changes to the Peruvian health
care system and achieved autonomy for almost a decade. Some of their pol-
icies and reform agendas still are considered controversial, but their leverage
in the sector is widely recognized. Nonetheless, this episode also shows the
limits of health policy experts’ autonomy and the difficulty of entrenching this
autonomy. What explains this period of moderate autonomy that ended in the
experts’ demise?

Explaining Health Experts’ Limited Autonomy and
Eventual Demise
This technocratic episode at MINSA highlights the effect of changes over time
in some of the factors in my theory. As in the previous episodes, experts gained
144                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

autonomy when politicians appointed them to implement policies that neither
they nor the ministerial bureaucracy could enact. Intermediate scores in two
of the factors favored this outcome: the increasing complexity of health policy
economics and the involvement of IFIs in health policy that evened the balance
of stakeholders in the health sector. The two other factors, technical consensus
and the political cost of poor policy performance, remained low. Thus when
IFI interest declined and politicians clashed with experts, technical autonomy
declined. Peruvian reforms did not incorporate middle and upper classes into
the public health system nor did they include private stakeholders interested
in public-good provision. Thus, these reforms did not have the same effects as
those in Colombia that made politicians concerned about health policy and
reliant on experts in the health sector. In this section, I first discuss how experts
exploited their knowledge to enhance technical autonomy; then I focus on the
four factors of my theory, looking at which favored technical autonomy and
which limited it.
    For almost a decade, until their demise, experts carefully maneuvered to
avoid political clashes and advance their reforms. As discussed previously,
politicians appointed experts and provided them with significant power to
address a series of external and internal demands. This delegation was sig-
nificant, allowing experts to work on their reform projects independent from
political oversight, but members of OCE also crafted this autonomy by acting
strategically. An example of this strategic action is experts’ secrecy. In contrast
to Colombian experts who publicly discussed the content of reforms, their
Peruvian counterparts opted to form policy proposals among themselves, with
little external involvement. This secretive style explains why Peruvian health
policy making was called “politics of stealth” (Ewig 1999; 2004).
    The technical team was aware that achieving legal changes in Congress
required negotiation and the active involvement of politicians, which might
arouse opposition. To avoid such problems, most of these reforms were made
through presidential or ministerial decrees. For example, PSBT, CLAS and other
programs were all adopted through such infra-legal rule changes, without con-
gressional involvement (Ewig 1999, 490–493; Arroyo 1999; interview with
Meloni 2007). Laws to institutionalize some of these reforms were adopted
much later, in 1997, with the approval of the Ley de Modernización de la
Seguridad Social en Salud (Ley 26790) and the Ley General de Salud (Ley
26842) (Arroyo 1999, 542–547; Ewig 1999; see also Ortiz de Zevallos et al.
1999, 22).
    The success of this “silent” strategy shows how much leverage experts can
gain when politicians lack information about ongoing policies. As discussed in
previous chapters, incumbent politicians were not fully aware of the reforms
and left decisions to the experts. Moreover, as discussed by diverse authors,
political opponents also remained unaware because they paid little attention
to health sector reforms and were not informed about changes in the ministry
(Arroyo 1999, 549–551; Ewig 2010, 98; Ortiz de Zevallos et al 1999, 27).
Health Technocrats in Peru                                                   145

   Commentators have suggested that this strategy made the policy changes
more vulnerable to future reversal (Arroyo 1999; Ewig 1999; 2004, 242–243;
Francke 2001; Ugarte and Monje 1999, 606–611; interviews with Francke
2007 and Pretell 2007). By not consulting with other actors, some argue that
experts failed to build a broad constituency in favor of reform that could have
prevented reversals. Others have highlighted the potential negative effects of
not debating publicly the content of these changes. Nevertheless, writing policy
behind closed doors was successful in the short term and clearly shows experts’
independent decision making.
   Further evidence of experts’ strategic action was their use of IFIs to protect
their reform efforts. Experts sought IFI support to prevent political interven-
tion in the reforms. For example, experts asked IFIs to pressure the government
to modify Fujimori’s school insurance program (SEG) so it would complement
the maternal and infant health insurance program that was later adopted
(Weyland 2006, 161–162). Similarly, they also supported IFIs’ and bilateral
agencies’ decision to insulate reform projects from the ministerial bureaucracy.
Experts were aware that this insulation reduced the chances of political inter-
vention, enhanced efficiency, and guaranteed autonomous room for expertise.
   However, as discussed in previous chapters, experts’ strategies are only part
of the story. Two factors identified by my theory – complexity and a more bal-
anced constellation of stakeholders – explain experts’ autonomy and relative
success in advancing a reform agenda. The low scores in the remaining factors
explain the limits to this autonomy and the experts’ final demise. I first discuss
the two positive factors, and then the remaining two that scored low.


Positive Factors
With the growing interest of IFIs, such as the World Bank and the IDB, in
health policy during the nineties, a more plural and balanced constellation
of stakeholders temporarily emerged. This episode exemplifies how a change
in the constellation of stakeholders can provide an opening for expertise to
emerge. This more balanced constellation of stakeholders favored experts in
many ways. First, it contributed to the appointment of experts. The incum-
bent appointed experts to poverty-alleviation programs in 1993 in order to
show the international financial community that the government was adopting
sound, responsible policies. Further, as mentioned, experts had the necessary
knowledge to respond to IFI demands and achieve the loan projects approved
in 1994.
   Second, it made experts necessary for politicians unwilling to alter the
reform projects already under way. Ministers were aware that replacing tech-
nocrats could affect IFI sponsored reform projects, providing experts with an
indirect coat of protection. In that way, IFIs gave experts more political space
and resources to advance their preferences and achieve autonomy. Finally, as
discussed previously, experts strategically used IFIs to gain leverage against
146                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

the incumbent. For all these reasons, IFIs’ involvement enhanced technical
­autonomy by making a more balanced constellation of stakeholders surround-
 ing health policy.
     However, even including IFIs, this constellation of stakeholders still remained
 unbalanced. To begin with, IFIs by themselves lack the power to check the
 incumbent’s power and limit intrusion in health policy, particularly in non-
 crisis conditions. IFIs’ involvement is always limited. These institutions may
 oppose certain decisions and exercise leverage by withholding funding, but
 they cannot block politicians determined to intervene in a certain policy area.
 For example, although IFIs opposed the SEG program, they could not stop
 Fujimori from going ahead with the plan. No expert interviewed mentioned
 IFI support as important to maintaining technical expertise when under politi-
 cal pressure. Two técnicos interviewed, who prefer to remain anonymous, even
 complained bitterly about the lack of support from these agencies when con-
 flicts with politicians arose.
     Furthermore, other than IFIs, no powerful actors were interested in health
 policy. There were only a handful of NGOs and some think tanks that paid
 attention to the health sector while private actors remained largely apathetic.
 Additionally, in open contrast to the situation in Colombia, the reforms did not
 foster any new stakeholders with strong interests on the content and quality of
 health policy. Despite its expanded coverage and new programs, the reforms
 largely maintained the structure of the system that had existed before the
 2000s. Thus when IFI involvement in health policy reform declined after 2000,
 the constellation of stakeholders became even more unbalanced.
     Increasing policy complexity due to health policy economics contributed
 to this period of expert autonomy. Now policies had to meet new criteria,
 such as cost effectiveness, which made decision making much more complex.
 This complexity contributed to experts’ autonomy, as the two nontechnical
 ministers who followed Vidal after 1991 were forced to rely on advice from
 technocrats. Policy complexity also explains technocrats’ considerable auton-
 omy after 1993. It was the need to have experts in the OCE who could effec-
 tively deal with international agencies in order to obtain external loans, and
 the decision to implement complex, targeted, poverty-alleviation policies that
 gave experts in MINSA considerable leverage, even if some ministers, such as
 Freundt or Costa Bauer, did not fully share their reform agenda.
     Handling these complex reform projects gave experts informal protection
 from political interference. Advancing reforms demanded high technical capac-
 ities to communicate with IFIs, which many politicians lack. According to the
 experts interviewed, each new minister wanted to know about the OCE proj-
 ects. Once they learned what OCE was working on, ministers realized that
 interfering in the office would potentially affect these complex reforms (inter-
 views with Meloni 2007 and Gozzer 2007). As a result, ministers preferred to
 leave the status quo untouched. Three different members of the OCE told the
 same anecdote. Given the usual short tenures in the health sector, these experts
Health Technocrats inÂ€Peru                                                              147

assumed that when they were first hired, their appointment would be brief.
After some months, they started to realize that they had achieved considerable
stability, even more so than the health ministers who “came and went” while
experts stayed in their positions (interviews with Gozzer 2007, Meloni 2007,
and Mendoza 2007).
   This stability is explained by the fact that experts were in charge of complex,
ongoing reforms, which made dismissing them politically risky. As discussed
later, this hesitation to intervene with internationally backed projects is also
evidence of the importance of stakeholders, such as IFIs, for technical auton-
omy. In sum, the higher level of technical complexity in this policy area, partly
caused by health policy economics, increased the level of expertise required to
design and implement policies.
   Nonetheless, even if more sophisticated than before, health policy has
remained less complex than economic policy. The consequences of these
reforms are more understandable for those working, or having interests, in
the health sector. Several of these decisions involve the allocation of distribut-
able goods across the territory, something that politicians are well aware of.
This lower complexity allowed other actors, such as doctors or politicians, to
interfere in policy decisions and reduce the amount of autonomy experts had.
In particular, Peruvian reform efforts were sometimes thwarted by political
interests. The clearest political intervention during the decade was Fujimori’s
decision to adopt the SEG against experts’ advice. Experts thus remained more
vulnerable in this important respect.


Negative Factors
The remaining two factors score low, thus helping us understand this episode’s
lower technical autonomy and the difficulties of entrenchment. First and more
important, this episode confirms that delivering poor health policy outcomes
has low political costs. Those affected by ineffective health policies in Peru
are generally poor and command very limited political influence. Additionally,
the population has grown accustomed to poor health policy and does not link
poor public health care to the incumbent.
   As a result, health policy is not a major political issue. The topic of health
care rarely comes up during presidential campaigns, and when it does, it
usually involves vague promises of reform with little technical substance.
Evidence of this lack of public interest in health policy is visible in opinion
polls. In recent years (2008, 2009, 2010, and 2011), when asked what were
the three most serious problems in Peru, poor health policy (salud pública
inadecuada) ranked ninth.4 In a similar question, in 2013, health ranked

4
    Ipsos-Apoyo, Opinión Data, Year 10, N.123. April 19th 2010. http://www.ipsos-Apoyo.com.pe/
    sites/default/files/opinion_data/Opinion%20Data%20Abril%202010.pdf; 28th February 2011,
    http://www.ipsos.pe/sites/default/files/opinion_data/Opinion%20Data%20Febrero%202011.pdf.
148                                    Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

twelfth.5 Asked about what issues candidates should address in debates
­during the presidential campaign, Peruvians ranked health seventh in 2006.6
 Even though other polls with a narrower list of issues do reveal greater pub-
 lic concern with health care, it rarely becomes politicized (IOP 2013, 5). As
 a result, there are few political consequences if politicians intrude in ongoing
 reforms and if performance in this sector remains weak.
     As previously discussed, this lack of political interest sometimes favored
 experts, as they could advance policies with little interference from politicians
 who were unaware of the ongoing reforms. Yet it also reduced the urgency of
 conducting reforms, which limited experts’ leverage. And when politicians did
 interfere, they could do so without political cost. Removing technical ministers
 and appointing prestigious doctors with little public health knowledge did not
 receive much public attention. Sometimes, politicians can even achieve short-
 term popular support by intervening. President Fujimori’s decision to adopt
 SEG in 1997 provides a good example: the policy was electorally attractive for
 his reelection effort in 2000. Ministers’ interference with experts’ policies or
 their lack of interest in technocratic reform plans clearly shows the relevance
 of this factor.
     In contrast to the Colombian case, Peruvian reforms did not change the
 system drastically in order to incorporate middle and upper classes. The
 formal-sector workers maintained a separate social security system that pro-
 vided health care, and the MEF-sponsored reforms created several private exit
 options. This continuing detachment of the middle and upper classes from the
 health system reduced the political saliency of this issue in Peru.
     The first factor related to the technical aspects of policy – expert consen-
 sus – also remained low in the Peru case. This was paradoxical. By the time of
 the reforms, the international health community was already reaching a con-
 sensus around a broad version of selective primary health care (Cueto 2004,
 1868–1869). Although selective primary health care was not yet an entirely
 unified paradigm, IFIs and a variety of international health organizations, such
 as the PAHO, WHO, and UNICEF, gradually took interest in selective primary
 health care, partly because it proposed realistic, measurable, and easy to mon-
 itor strategies (Yglesias 1999, 531).
     Health experts in the OCE considered themselves part of this growing
 international consensus. In the words of one expert, “We are in a process
 of ­internationalization of the politics of health. Like in economics, you see
 that there are a series of economic policies that have an international level of
 consensus. Health [policy] is in a process of that kind” (anonymous health
 expert, interviewed by Ewig 2010, 81). Experts’ designed their 1995 reform
 plan adhering to this consensus. Technocrats sought to promote both equity
 through subsidized insurance regimes and efficiency by creating competition

5
    Ipsos-Apoyo, Opinión Data. April 2013.
6
    Ipsos-Apoyo, Opinión Data. May 2006.
Health Technocrats in Peru                                                                      149

in the health and social security systems. According to a local observer, this
reform plan represented a centrist option (Arroyo 2001, 14).
   Nonetheless, within Peru, this nascent consensus did not exist in the early
nineties. Some Peruvian health policy experts saw the international position
as too neoliberal. These técnicos, who favored a single national health care
system (Arroyo 2000, 73), were active during the nineties in the Peruvian
Academy of Health, medical associations, and the Institute of Social Security
(interview with Sánchez Moreno 2007). Another group of experts continued to
promote the original version of primary health care or a rights-based approach
to health policy (interview with Tejada de Rivero 2007; Arroyo 2000, 75–76,
161; Yglesias 1999, 529; Vidal 1994a, 314). These specialists accused experts
in MINSA of uncritical foreign health policy reform recipes.7
   Yet MINSA experts were vulnerable to proposals from the right. MEF tech-
nocrats, in particular, favored an extreme neoliberal version of selective pri-
mary health care inspired by the Chilean health policy reform. As evidenced
by the MEF’s support for the neoliberal proposals contained in the OSS decree
of 1991 and the EPS reform of 1996, these policy divisions remained acute
throughout the decade (Arroyo 1999, 552–553; 2000, 162).
   This lack of consensus over health policy weakened experts’ position in
favor of a centrist reform. As discussed in Chapter 3, this lack of consen-
sus opens the door for politicians to choose among these different available
options. The neoliberal experts behind Boloña’s OSS and Costa Bauer’s EPS
reforms show how divergent technical opinions could be exploited by politi-
cians to advance their preferred policies. Similarly, when Fujimori demanded
the implementation of SEG, the minister appointed experts willing to do so
(Ewig 2010: 112–115).
   As these incidents show, experts with different perspectives were sometimes
working side by side within MINSA but pushing reforms in different direc-
tions. Internal disputes wasted energy that could have been directed toward a
common reform plan. MINSA experts certainly did not help build a consensus
on health policy in Peru; they opted not to consult other actors in the health
sector or publicly debate reform proposals, which may have reduced the possi-
bility of achieving a broader consensus (Ewig 1999:491–492). Clearly, this lack
of consensus did not allow reformist health policy experts to present a unified
front to politicians, thereby weakening their position.
   The medium scores – at least temporarily – on two of the factors in my
theory, and the low scores on the others, indicate that experts’ autonomy was
weak and more vulnerable to political intrusion. Experts enjoyed considerable

7
    Ministers themselves tend to have quite strong opinions about the perspectives preferred by their
    predecessors. For example, Minister Vidal criticized strongly Minister Tejada and his “health for
    all” approach for its strong emphasis on preventive measures. According to Vidal, such empha-
    sis leaves aside curative measures and disregards the importance of hospitals for public health
    (Vidal 1994a, 314–315).
150                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

leverage in MINSA, but never achieved enough power to push through their
preferred policies or gain a stable, entrenched position. When IFIs’ interest in
health policy reform declined and experts clashed with politicians, technical
autonomy in MINSA largely evaporated.
    Before concluding, it is worth mentioning the MINSA epidemiology office,
which has been an exceptional pocket of autonomy over the last thirty years,
has maintained high levels of technical expertise and continuity. The per-
sonnel in this area have more technical skills than elsewhere in the health
sector bureaucracy, and its directors enjoy longer tenures (Arroyo 2001, 50;
interviews with Espinoza 2007 and Ramírez 2007). This office is part of an
­international community of epidemic research, receiving funds from USAID
 and Johns Hopkins University to collect and analyze information about epi-
 demics in Peru.
    This higher technical level was successfully crafted by epidemiology officials.
 To insulate and professionalize the office during the eighties, epidemiology offi-
 cials created a special course on epidemic readiness and response (Programa
 de Especialización en Epidemiología de Campo, or PREC) that all personnel
 were required to take (interviews with Espinoza 2007 and Ramírez 2007).
 The program was fully funded by external aid and administered by a private
 university, thus limiting political influence. PREC shows how epidemiologists
 successfully reformed their own rules around appointment to guarantee that
 only qualified individuals worked in this area. Why were epidemiologists capa-
 ble of doing this?
    My theory shows how more favorable conditions in this area led epidemiol-
 ogists to have greater autonomy. First, policy making in the area is quite com-
 plex. Officials require specialized education in controlling epidemics and must
 be capable of managing a complex statistical system that tracks epidemics,
 which limits the possibility that unqualified personnel are appointed. Second,
 epidemiology is an area in which expertise remains largely uncontested and
 epidemiologists form a close, cohesive, and global community. Third, the polit-
 ical costs of not following specialized advice in epidemics control could be
 enormous. As mentioned by a health specialist, no politician wants to deal with
 a pandemic (interview with Espinoza 2007). These costs provided epidemiol-
 ogy with a sort of “natural” protection from political intrusion. Finally, stake-
 holders such as USAID and Johns Hopkins University support epidemiólogos
 with resources and are key allies to further their expertise. As a result, the office
 remains quite professional and autonomous. In sum, where several of my fac-
 tors happen to be present, technocratic autonomy does emerge in the health
 sector.

Conclusion
Along with the previous chapter, the Peruvian health case shows that even in
less likely policy areas, experts can muster considerable autonomy and advance
Health Technocrats in Peru                                                      151

their preferred policies. The need to reform health care led to the appoint-
ment of experts in MINSA. From the OCE and other areas of MINSA, experts
­employing various strategies were able to conduct piecemeal health policy
 reforms and insulate these changes from political intervention. The higher
 scores on two of the factors (policy complexity and constellation of stake-
 holders) contributed to the temporary autonomy of health experts in MINSA.
 Nonetheless, the lower scores in the remaining factors explain why this tech-
 nocracy was not strong enough to resist intrusion and, as a result, eventually
 failed to entrench itself. The conditions were not favorable for technical auton-
 omy, especially once IFIs lost some of their interest on health policy reform at
 the end of the decade.
     A crucial difference with the more successful Colombian health technocracy
 lies in the lack of powerful stakeholders invested in keeping experts in charge
 of health policy after the reform. In Peru, health provision still remains linked
 to hospitals and other public facilities. There are few private actors involved in
 public health, such as health providers or insurers as in Colombia, that create
 cross pressures on the incumbent to appoint técnicos and then informally pro-
 tect them. Without such stakeholders, Peruvian experts remained vulnerable
 and had fewer opportunities to entrench their autonomy.
     Additionally important, in Colombia the health system now includes mid-
 dle- and upper-class individuals, thus increasing the political cost of poor pol-
 icy performance. Colombian politicians face strong public criticism if they do
 not respond to crises in the medical system. Yet in Peru, the health care sys-
 tem mainly concerns poor sectors of society and is largely irrelevant in public
 debate except around the time of elections.
     Interestingly, although these conditions in Peru overall remain unfavorable,
 the factors related to technical policy have now become more conducive to
 expert autonomy than in the past. In the last decade, the epistemic commu-
 nity of health policy experts in Peru has grown and health policy has become
 more complex. Since 2000, this community has helped the World Bank and
 local think tanks produce a considerable amount of work on public health
 (Alvarado Pérez and Lenz 2006, 145–147). Among these experts exists a grow-
 ing consensus on what constitutes adequate health policy. Even if some experts
 promote a rights-based approach to health care and others focus more on selec-
 tive health policies, most agree that any health policy reforms need to address
 resource limitations and prioritize reforms toward those most in need (Arroyo
 1999, 561; 2000, 86; Chon et al. 2011; Francke 2001, 21–23; interview with
 Portocarrero 2010). However, until now these changes in the technical aspects
 of policy in civil society have not led to a significant increase in experts’ auton-
 omy in MINSA.
8

Conclusion: Technocratic Autonomy, Its Limits, and
Democracy in Latin America




This book presents an in-depth comparative analysis of technocrats in Latin
American democracies. Through the study of six technocratic episodes in
Colombia and Peru, I propose that technocrats in the region are best concep-
tualized as autonomous, capable of pursuing preferences that are distinct from
those of other important sociopolitical actors, such as their political superiors,
IFIs, and businesses. This finding provides strong evidence against ­arguments
that derive experts’ role from these powerful actors. Instead, technocrats are
independent actors who, due to their position in the state, are frequently
first movers in policy reform thus successful in implementing their preferred
changes. Experts’ actions and choices carry important economic, social, and
political consequences in Latin America.
    The theory of technocratic autonomy developed in Chapter 3 explains both
the source of experts’ autonomy and the variation in this autonomy across
policy areas and time periods. Technocrats’ main source of power is their
expertise. After their appointment, generally motivated by politicians’ need
to solve an acute problem, experts gradually gain control over policy mak-
ing. By increasing the sophistication of public policy, experts immediately raise
the technical bar required to participate in policy debates. Yet technocrats are
more than passive actors: they use their expertise strategically, aiming to pro-
tect and enhance their autonomy.
    The degree of experts’ autonomy, however, varies across policy areas. Some
experts are more influential and more likely to entrench their autonomy than
are others. My theory explains this variation with four factors. The first two
politics of policy factors determine where technocratic autonomy is more likely
to emerge and become entrenched. The first of these factors is the political
cost of poor policy performance; the second is the constellation of powerful
stakeholders surrounding a policy area. When poor policy performance has
severe negative consequences for politicians, and there is a balanced collection


152
Conclusion                                                                   153

of stakeholders in which each prefers empowering experts over allowing
another actor to control policy making, technical autonomy becomes more
likely. Together, these two factors explain a considerable degree of the varia-
tion in whether experts enjoy meaningful autonomy and are protected from
political intrusion.
   By granting technocrats more space in which to develop their autonomy,
these conditions also largely determine if experts will remain influential over
time. Technical entrenchment occurs as citizens and powerful actors become
invested in technical stability and thus support experts’ continuity. Furthermore,
the policies technocrats sponsor can raise the political cost of interfering with
expert continuity and increase the influence of actors who prefer experts to
remain empowered.
   Although less consequential, two other factors related to the technical aspects
of policy also explain some variation in technocratic autonomy. When positive,
these factors increase both autonomy and the chances of technical continuity.
First, greater technical complexity in a policy area makes expertise more nec-
essary and helps experts to exclude nontechnical actors from policy making.
Second, strong technocratic consensus in a policy area gives experts’ prescrip-
tions legitimacy and limits the possibility that sitting experts are replaced by
others with preferences closer to those of the incumbent. These conditions are
most relevant when the politics of policy factors already favor technical auton-
omy. By themselves, technical consensus and complexity will not get experts
appointed in the state. And even if experts are appointed, these factors will not
provide technocrats the leverage and informal protections enjoyed by those in
policy areas where the first two factors are high. However, when the costs of
policy performance and the constellation of stakeholders favor experts, these
technical aspects of policy making significantly affect the level of technical
autonomy and whether this independence entrenches.
   The analysis of economic and health policy experts in Colombia and Peru
provides empirical support for this theory. In all six episodes, technocrats
gained considerable influence over policy making in areas of government
under their control; even health policy experts exercised considerable influence
despite existing theories that suggest this outcome is unlikely. Consistent with
my theory, however, I show that economic experts enjoyed significantly more
autonomy than did health policy experts. Economic technocrats were more
likely to gain autonomy and entrench it over time, while health policy experts
remained more vulnerable and entrenchment less likely.
   In two of the episodes, Colombia from 1958 to 2013 and Peru from 1990
to 2013, economic technocrats exercised considerable autonomy and achieved
long-lasting stability because of their strategic actions and the advantageous
conditions they enjoyed. In the three health policy episodes, experts mustered
enough autonomy to conduct reforms that shaped policy within their issue
area. Nonetheless, as expected by my theory, in the two health policy episodes,
Colombia from 1966 to 1970 and Peru from 1990 to 2002, in which the four
154                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

factors scored lower, experts eventually lost their positions after clashing with
political interests.
    Variation in these factors also explains how autonomy within a policy area
changes over time. In the first Peruvian economic episode (1980–1983), politi-
cians did not realize the potential political costs of an economic crisis, so they
continually interfered with technical decisions to cut public deficits and sub-
ordinated policy making to electoral interests. Additionally, the absence of a
­balanced constellation of stakeholders limited experts’ autonomy. These factors
 largely explain experts’ demise, as there were few barriers to political interven-
 tion in the policy area. Furthermore, the lack of technical consensus weakened
 technocrats, because politicians could pick other experts who would question
 the conclusions of “Team Dynamo” on substantive grounds. As a result, politi-
 cians and business interests were able to successfully prevent MEF technocrats
 from implementing their preferred reforms.
    In contrast, higher political costs of poor health policy and a more plural con-
 stellation of stakeholders facilitated the emergence of a more autonomous public
 health technocracy in Colombia in the early 1990s that has persisted to the pre-
 sent day. The increasing complexity of health policy due to the introduction of
 health policy economics contributed to this outcome by widening the informa-
 tion asymmetry between experts and other actors. Although neither as strong nor
 stable as economic technocrats, Colombian health policy experts have remained
 relevant actors in health policy and, in the medium term, Colombian presidents
 seem dependent on them to manage a politically sensitive policy area.
    Similar trends to those observed in my economic episodes are found in
 diverse Latin American countries, such as Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, El
 Salvador, and Mexico, where economic policy is, or has been, dominated by
 technocrats (Koivumaeki 2010; Montecinos 2005; P. Silva 2008; Babb 2001;
 Schneider 1998; Teichman 1997). After their appointment to economic institu-
 tions in the 1970s and 1980s, economic experts achieved meaningful auton-
 omy and significant stability. Although some technocrats eventually lost this
 power, others have maintained their relevance and capacity to overcome polit-
 ical opposition to their proposals, even where political turnover has produced
 new incumbents with different policy preferences than the politicians who ini-
 tially appointed the experts.
    In México, experts gained autonomy in the Ministry of Finance when the
 government of Carlos Salinas (1988–1994) sought to implement economic
 reforms (Teichman 1997; Centeno 1993). After Mexico’s democratic transi-
 tion in 2000, these technocrats remained strong. A high degree of technical
 control over economic policy also persisted in Chile after its 1989 demo-
 cratic transition and a string of presidents from the center-left Concertación.
 Christian Democrats hired the so-called CIEPLAN monks to take over eco-
 nomic policy from Pinochet’s Chicago Boys (Patricio Silva 2008). The socialist
 governments of Ricardo Lagos and Michele Bachelet, and right-wing President
 Sebastián Piñera, have all continued to select technically qualified appointees
Conclusion                                                                              155

for economic institutions. Similarly, the leftist Partido dos Trabalhadores in
Brazil was very careful to signal a commitment to economic policy continuity
with their first ministerial appointments after the highly technocratic govern-
ment of Fernando Henrique Cardoso.
   At the same time, with exception of Brazil, Costa Rica, and a few other
countries, health policy experts in Latin America are generally much less influ-
ential than are their economic counterparts and their stability more precarious.
During the nineties, IFI-sponsored reforms expanded technical capacities in
health policy across the region, but most ministries remain poorly financed and
technically weak (Kaufman and Nelson 2004; Nelson 2004).
   While the exceptions to this pattern deserve a more detailed analysis than
I can provide here, the Costa Rican case provides some insights about the rel-
evance of the politics of policy factors. This health bureaucracy has attracted
academic attention for its quality and professionalism (McGuire 2010, 65–93;
Weyland 2006, ch. 4). Although what we find in this country is more a profes-
sional health bureaucracy than a technocratic “island of efficiency” within a
larger ministry, my explanatory factors are still relevant for this case. In Costa
Rica, since the early seventies all social classes belong to a single health care
system, which raises the costs of failing to deliver adequate health policy out-
comes (McGuire 2010, 74–76; McGuire 2001, 1681). Additionally, strong
parties competing for lower- and middle-class voters, and workers’ unions
(although weak) acting as stakeholders that wanted to strengthen social ser-
vices, made health policy an important national political issue (McGuire 2010,
83–84; McGuire 2001, 1677). As a result, health policy experts have significant
control over policy to the point that they can successfully oppose IFI prescrip-
tions (Weyland 2006, ch. 4; McGuire 2010, 80–81).
   More broadly, my theory’s predictions can be applied to técnicos in other
policy areas of Latin American states. Ministries of commerce and central
banks are both policy making institutions with similar conditions to those
in economic areas, especially in regard to my politics of policy factors. Thus,
they are more likely cases for technocratic autonomy. In these policy areas,
we observe considerably greater technical stability across the region.1 In con-
trast, conditions in social policy sectors, such as education and labor ministries,
resemble those found in health ministries; they are thus less likely areas for
technical autonomy. Reform teams in these policy areas can sometimes enact
significant changes (Grindle 2004; Nelson 2004), but fully implementing them
and achieving continuity for experts are more difficult.
   These results shed light on the understudied variation in capacity of different
agencies within the state throughout Latin America and the developing world.2
While some sectors inside Latin American states are highly professional, others

1
    The autonomy of central banks in the region are discussed in Taylor 2009 and Boylan 1998.
2
    For exceptions see: E. Huber 1995: 169–170; Hildebrandt and Grindle 1997; Graham et al.
    1999; Bersch, Praça, and Taylor 2012.
156                             Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

remain poorly financed, badly equipped, and largely unable to achieve their
institutional goals. Although capacity does vary between state institutions in
developed countries as well, it tends to be more uniform, because agencies
have a larger base of resources and capable personnel that allow them to per-
form their duties. The factors I identify open an avenue of research examining
which agencies are more likely to gain autonomy and efficiently exercise their
authority.
   In sum, this book confirms the importance of technocrats as political actors
in Latin America and their decisive role in policy making. I explain the source
of technical power and its variation across both time and policy areas. Some
questions remain open, however. Under what conditions would powerful
experts that have achieved considerable continuity lose their power? What are
the implications of these findings for theoretical debates about policy making
and politics in the region? What are the practical lessons of these results for
policy makers and reformers? Finally, do autonomous experts affect the qual-
ity of democracy in the region? In this concluding section, I focus on these and
other issues.


The Fall of Experts
My descriptions of economic technocrats as autonomous and entrenched may
lead readers unfamiliar with Latin America to think that once they have estab-
lished themselves in a policy area, experts are resilient to almost any political
challenge. Recent episodes in the region show that this conclusion is exag-
gerated. Other economic experts, widely seen as powerful and stable in their
countries, fell and policy areas became less technical. New officials appointed
in these areas were subordinated to politicians’ demands and lost considerable
control over policy making. How and why did these entrenched experts lose
their saliency?
   As discussed in Chapter 3, I propose that the politics of policy factors
from my theory are crucial for limiting political intrusion in technical policy
areas and thus explaining technical downfall. Abrupt changes in these two
factors open the door for technical demise even when technical autonomy
is entrenched. Thus we expect events that reduce the political costs of firing
experts, and political processes that drastically unbalance the constellation of
stakeholders in a policy area, to lead to technocrats’ downfall. Although these
factors can operate independently, together they make the fall of técnicos more
likely. Additionally, the lack of technical consensus can contribute to this out-
come by weakening the legitimacy of state experts’ technical prescriptions and
allowing politicians to select other technically qualified appointees with com-
peting perspectives.
   Cases of economic technocratic downfall in the Argentine and Bolivian eco-
nomic ministries show the relevance of these factors. Although not an economic
case, the demise of technocrats in Venezuela’s state oil company (Petroléos de
Conclusion                                                                    157

Venezuela, PDVSA) also demonstrates the saliency of these two factors. In these
three episodes, we see an overall loss of technocratic autonomy, with consid-
erable decreases in the technical level of the policy area and significantly more
dependence on incumbents.
   Throughout the nineties, technocrats in the Argentine Ministry of Economics
were widely considered powerful and secure in their positions. Although the
Ministry of Finance had long been more professional than were other areas of
the Argentine state, it became highly technocratic and increasingly power­ful dur-
ing the neoliberal reforms under Peronist President Carlos Menem (Teichman
1997). Domingo Cavallo, Menem’s second Minister of Economics, represented
the apex of this technical power. Appointed to resolve the country’s economic
crisis, from 1991 to 1996 Cavallo oversaw a profound market reform pro-
cess that drastically changed the Argentinean state (Teichman 1997; Weyland
2002a, 148; Corrales 2011). Among Cavallo’s adopted measures was a bold
and original convertibility plan that tied the Argentinean Peso to the U.S. dollar.
IFIs and the business community considered Cavallo’s continuity to be a clear
commitment to prudent macroeconomic policy and fiscal responsibility that
limited Menem’s capacity to control the ministry (Teichman 1997, 48). After
Cavallo, the ministry retained its influential position in Argentinean politics,
and diverse authors have highlighted the immense power of economic tech-
nocrats during those years (Corrales 2011; Teichman 1997; Weyland 2002a).
President Fernando de la Rúa (1999–2001), a politician from the opposition
Radical Party, bowed to economic continuity, promising to maintain the market
model and convertibility. Convertibility was perceived by the population and
powerful economic actors as a guarantee of stability (Panizza 2013, 30).
   This situation began to change with the 1999 financial crisis. Economic tech-
nocrats in the ministry were associated with the neoliberal reforms of the early
nineties, which a growing percentage of Argentines believed contributed to the
crisis. After failing to respond to the crisis, De la Rúa attempted to address
the growing economic emergency by reappointing, in March 2001, Cavallo as
his third Minister of Economics (Weyland 2002a, 202). However, this move
proved unpopular with many Argentines who blamed Cavallo’s reforms for
their current problems (Weyland 2002a, 202–204).
   Some of Cavallo’s measures, such as his controversial decision to freeze
bank accounts (el corralito), further polarized Argentines and, more interest-
ingly, attracted criticism from stakeholders such as the international financial
community (Weyland 2002a, 204). When the ongoing crisis led President De la
Rúa to resign in December 2001, Cavallo also left the Ministry. After several
caretaker presidents appointed by Congress resigned in the following month,
Eduardo Duhalde was able to achieve some political and economic stability
upon taking office in January 2002 and finish out De la Rua’s term. One of
Duhalde’s first measures was to end convertibility.
   Duhalde appointed Roberto Lavagna as Minister of Economics in May
2002. A heterodox economist who was part of former President Raúl Alfonsin’s
158                             Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

(1983–1989) economic team, Lavagna changed some orthodox policies while
maintaining quite strict macroeconomic management (Panizza 2013, 33). A
change of technical perspective did not lead to a reduction of technocratic
power. Newly elected President Néstor Kirchner (2003–2007), an old-style
populist of the Peronist party, retained Lavagna in his position.
    Nonetheless, when the crisis receded and Kirchner achieved a clear victory
in the November 2005 legislative elections, the president asked for Lavagna’s
resignation. From then on, Kirchner was able to politicize economic decision
making and considerably reduce technical capacity in economic institutions.
To do so, Kirchner fired experts and hired economists with fewer technical
credentials but policy positions closer to his own preferences. The incumbent’s
control over economic policy is considerably higher than in the past. Cristina
Fernández de Kirchner has largely maintained these trends (Redrado 2010;
Noriega 2010).
    Although less influential than in Argentina, economic experts in Bolivia
also achieved considerable stability in the Ministry of Finance, particularly in
the Vice Ministry of Public Finance. This technocracy gained relevance during
the early attempt at market reform initiated by MNR President Víctor Paz
Estenssoro (1985–1989) and continued by his successor MIR leader Jaime Paz
Zamora (1989–1993). However, these technocratic trends matured during the
first government of Gonzalo “Goni” Sánchez de Lozada (1993–1997). A poli­
tician from a traditional party, the Movimiento Nacionalista Revolucionario
(MNR), and technocrat himself, Goni had a highly technical style of govern-
ment and adopted broad reforms in line with IFI’s recommendations (World
Bank 2000). According to George Gray Molina (2007), this was not a case of a
president ceding controls to technocrats but rather a technocratic actor himself
fostering technical policy making through groups of experts. This continuity
remained through the presidency of former dictator Hugo Banzer (1997–2001),
who resigned due to health problems and had his term completed by his vice
president Jorge Quiroga (2001–2002).
    However, changes in political and economic conditions eventually toppled
experts. The 2000s brought strong and sometimes violent protests against the
party system, which was strongly associated with market policies and corruption
(Mayorga 2002; Gingerich 2010). Evo Morales, leader of the MAS party, was
at the forefront of these protests. Huge mobilizations against water privatiza-
tion (Guerra del Agua, April 2000) and gas exports (Guerra del Gas 2003) put
the government under a state of siege. In 2002, Sánchez de Lozada narrowly
won the presidency with 22.5 percent of the vote over Morales who garnered
20.9 percent. Yet the political landscape had changed significantly from Sánchez
de Lozada’s first term. Conditions were now very unfriendly for technocrats
(and traditional political parties in general), with the president besieged by
indigenous and civil society anti-neoliberal protests (Madrid 2008).
    Violent repression against the protestors led Sánchez de Lozada to step
down in 2003. Vice President Carlos Mesa was able to recover some stability,
Conclusion                                                                                        159

but protests continued and he also resigned. Morales won fresh elections in
2005 with an astounding 54 percent of the vote that empowered him to ini-
tiate sweeping changes. This transformation included reversing several market
reforms in an effort to build a new pluricultural and socialist state. Technocrats
in the Ministry of Finance were associated with the old neoliberal regime and
consequently saw their power reduced. Since then, economic policy has more
closely followed the priorities of Morales and MAS in their effort to use the
state to fulfill the goals of the so-called Bolivian Revolution.3
   These two cases show the relevance of the two politics of policy factors
for technocratic downfall. First, in both countries technocrats’ power weak-
ened when crises abruptly reduced the costs politicians faced for firing experts.
Severe economic upheaval in Argentina and political turmoil in Bolivia elim-
inated the popular legitimacy of experts’ technical approach, allowing politi-
cians to replace them. In public opinion, orthodox experts in both countries
went from being seen as guarantors against instability to culprits of economic
mayhem. Thus for politicians, where technocratic stability and independence
had once been a significant political asset, it was now perceived as a liability.
   In Argentina, this downfall was gradual. Initially, orthodox experts blamed
for the mounting economic crisis lost their positions. These experts were con-
sidered part of the neoliberal elite that had acted against the public interest in
previous years. Nonetheless, this case shows that firing technical teams in the
midst of an economic crisis and filling their positions with political loyalists
may still be too risky for politicians. Although Duhalde replaced orthodox
experts with heterodox experts in line with popular demands, this did not
mean decision making in the Ministry became less technical. Lavagna and his
team maintained enough autonomy to limit political intrusion and adopt their
own policy preferences. It was only when a partial economic recovery, in part
led by the commodity boom, reduced the potential cost of firing experts and,
as discussed later, Kirchner gained additional leverage in Congress, that the
incumbent strongly reduced the technical level in the Ministry of Economics.
   In Bolivia, Evo Morales and his party blamed technocrats for exclusionary
politics and limiting the use of natural resources for national development.
Because the crisis in this case was more political than economic, the risks of
politicizing economic policy in order to gain control over resources were low
from the start. Rising gas and mining rents provided Morales with sufficient
economic resources to conduct his reforms.
   The second factor, a balanced constellation of stakeholders, was also crucial
in both cases. Although more clearly in Bolivia, both countries experienced the

3
    It is worth noting, however, that this higher political control over economic policy has not meant
    an irresponsible handling of macroeconomic policy. Economic officials have less power than in
    the past, but this has not lead to populist macroeconomic policy. In clear contrast to Venezuela’s
    Bolivarian revolution, Bolivia has reversed several market reforms (privatization, social security,
    and financial reforms, for example) but keeps macroeconomic stability under check.
160                               Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

emergence of a dominant incumbent that severely unbalanced the ­constellation
of stakeholders and contributed to experts’ downfall. As dominant actors,
incumbents in Argentina and Bolivia were able to politicize technical policy
areas. Morales achieved considerable control over Congress as well as over
regional and municipal governments, which limited the ability of the political
opposition to block his policies. Similarly, Kirchner gradually built a governing
coalition that gained considerable control over Congress. The 2005 legislative
election gave the president enough power to dismiss Lavagna. Under these
conditions, experts’ allies had little capacity to protect them. Experts’ antago-
nizing of stakeholders, as happened in Argentina when Cavallo clashed with
businesses and IFIs, meant this support was expected to be even lower.
   Before concluding these economic cases, it is worth mentioning that the pol-
icy consensus factor also played a significant role in Argentina. Here, heterodox
economic experts remained prominent during the nineties even though they lost
saliency in other Latin American countries. As such, Duhalde could find alter-
natives to orthodox experts’ policies that were still technical. Similarly, Néstor
Kirchner and Cristina Fernández de Kirchner both used anti-market rhetoric
to justify their appointment of less well-credentialed heterodox experts in the
Ministry of Economics.
   Although not a case involving economic technocrats, the story of experts in
Venezuela’s state oil company (PDVSA) further demonstrates how the politics
of policy factors contribute to technical experts’ downfall. This case shows
how the same mechanisms affecting technocrats in state institutions also oper-
ate in public enterprises in Latin America. Few institutions had the prestige
or technical capacity of PDVSA. Created when oil was nationalized in 1975,
PDVSA quickly became an independent and autonomous institution. Even
though other areas of the state were part of their clientelistic networks, the
two parties in power at the time respected the autonomy of the corporation in
charge of administering the oil rent, and PDVSA became known for its profes-
sional level (Corrales and Penfold 2011, 76).
   In 1998, Hugo Chávez defeated the remnants of Venezuela’s two-party sys-
tem and assumed the presidency. The former army commander quickly gained
popularity among citizens who were tired of worsening economic conditions
and the corrupt traditional parties that had dominated politics for forty years.
During his first years in office, Chávez adopted a series of measures to concen-
trate power, including a new constitution approved in 1999. Chávez’s control
over the state and the horizontal institutions meant to check his power was
immense, leading to the development of a competitive authoritarian regime in
the early 2000s (Levitsky and Way 2010, 178).
   Although Chávez repeatedly clashed with PDVSA in an effort to control its
resources, the company maintained significant autonomy for several years. Its
prestige, institutional strength, and the crucial role of oil rents in Venezuela kept
Chávez in check. However, the 2003 oil strike changed this situation. When
the strike failed, Chávez retaliated against PDVSA directors and employees
Conclusion                                                                   161

that had previously opposed him and took control of the company. Profiting
from ­previous institutional changes designed to centralize authority in PDVSA
in order to make the company more efficient, Chávez appointed a politically
subordinated manager that largely eliminated the institution’s autonomy.
Furthermore, a 2001 law limited the involvement of private enterprises in the
petroleum sector by mandating the state have at least a 51 percent stake in all
new projects. Private companies lost relevance in oil activities (Corrales and
Penfold 2011, 77–82). Within a few years, the state enterprise was entirely
subordinate to the government and Chávez had full control over oil rents that
allowed him to expand his social programs and strengthen his grip over the
state until his death in March 2013.
   This case confirms how a dominant incumbent can reduce technical capacity
with little opposition from stakeholders. The lack of a strong opposition party
or other private stakeholders with sufficient clout to protect PDVSA eroded
the institution’s power. Additionally, in the midst of a commodity boom with
oil prices at record levels, Chávez had considerable space to use the oil rents
for his political project and reduce the perceived and immediate costs of firing
experts. There were few political costs for interfering with this state enterprise
but many gains. Everything was aligned against the technocratic management
of PDVSA.
   In conclusion, these cases show that entrenched technocratic autonomy can
decline when events drastically reduce the political costs of firing experts and
the constellation of stakeholders becomes unbalanced. Thus my theory of tech-
nocratic autonomy is also useful to explain instances when previously autono-
mous experts lose influence. In the absence of such dramatic events, technical
autonomy as found in my economic episodes seems quite stable.

The Limits of Political Incentives and Structural
Theories for the Analysis of Policy Making
As mentioned in the introduction, the “output” side of politics deserves much
more attention than it has received from Latin Americanists because the power
of political and economic forces can only be properly weighted through an
analysis of policy outcomes (Carpenter 2001, 11; Weyland 2006, 11–14). My
analysis supports this position. It points to the limitations of political-incen-
tives and structural theories of policy making and politics more generally in
Latin America. As the episodes I discuss show, these approaches attribute too
much weight to particular actors while neglecting the importance of others,
such as technocrats.
   Theories that focus on political incentives to explain policy choices fail to
recognize that politicians’ interests alone do not determine policy (Weyland
2002b, 64–66). Although the assumption that politicians dictate policy may
be accurate where bureaucracies are weak, my study shows that certain state
actors, such as technocrats, can restrain politicians and escape their control
162                              Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

in ways not compatible with political-incentives theories. Furthermore, some
of the episodes I discuss show that politicians are frequently unaware of the
­content of policy, including those policies that have significant short- and
 medium-term political repercussions. Certainly, on other occasions, politicians
 may defeat experts and reduce the technical level of policy areas. However
 overall, technocrats in the region are much more autonomous and relevant
 than political-incentives theories recognize.
     It is worth mentioning that these results do not only apply to developing
 states. Many authors see bureaucratic behavior in developed, institutionalized,
 and more politically stable countries through an political-incentives lens as the
 product of a calculated delegation by elected politicians: actors within the state
 are mere agents of politicians due to politicians’ control over resources and leg-
 islative capabilities. Policy decisions are assumed to correspond to politicians’
 desires and goals (McCubbins and Schwartz 1984; Chang, De Figueiredo,
 and Weingast 2000; Huber and Shipan 2002). Some influential studies have
 challenged these assumptions, showing that politicians, even in highly insti-
 tutionalized countries, lack such total control over bureaucracies (Moe 1990;
 2005; Carpenter 2001). Politicians cannot always ensure agencies’ obedience,
 bureaucrats possess several strategies for escaping such control, and state agen-
 cies can advance their goals and contest efforts to reform them. In short, state
 actors, whether in Latin America or developed democracies, have much more
 relevance than political-incentives theories usually acknowledge.
     Similarly, structural theories that focus on economic forces, external or
 internal, as the main determinants of policy underestimate the importance of
 technocrats. On the one hand, external-structural perspectives exaggerate the
 power of IFIs over local actors. As my study shows, experts are not subor-
 dinated to IFIs. While IFIs provide experts with new policy ideas and may
 even join forces to push forward particular policies, technical policies in Latin
 America result from the preferences of domestic experts rather than the for-
 eign structural forces IFIs represents. Furthermore, the cases I discuss show
 how Latin American states use experts to counterbalance the expertise of these
 external forces in order to defend themselves against their sometimes unwel-
 come policy recommendations.
     Domestic structural perspectives also exaggerate the power of the private
 sector over technocrats. These theories assume that dominant business inter-
 ests have the capacity to transform their preferences into policies by capturing
 parts of the state and making state actors such as technocrats their agents. This
 may be true for certain agencies lacking the resources to oppose business inter-
 ests or a balanced constellation of stakeholders that limits business intrusion.
 But these theories ignore how technocrats have sometimes used their power to
 transform the structure of an economy against the wishes of dominate business
 groups, as happened in Colombia and Peru during recent decades.
     The assumptions of both structural and political-incentives theories pro-
 vide an unrealistic and simplistic account of policy making in the region. I
Conclusion                                                                     163

concur with Barbara Geddes’s conclusion about economic liberalization in the
­developing world that a structural-economic paradigm based on the “central-
 ity of economic interests” cannot “account for the most important empirical
 regularities emerging from these and other studies of the politics of economic
 liberalization” (Geddes 1995, 214). But a similar criticism can be applied to
 Geddes’s own illuminating efforts to build a new paradigm based on “politi-
 cians, their interests, and the political circumstances that shape the way in which
 they pursue their interests” (Geddes 1995, 214). Both paradigms, political and
 structural, disregard the role of state actors like technocrats and thus cannot
 account for important patterns in policy making, and politics in general.
    In sum, experts deserve to be considered actors in their own right along
 with politicians, business actors, and IFIs. They initiate policies according to
 their preferences and often successfully modify their countries’ political and
 economic landscapes. A proper analysis of policy making in Latin America
 requires incorporating technocrats, weighting their influence in different policy
 areas, and analyzing their interaction with other political actors.


Practical Lessons for Policy Makers
This work also has relevant implications for policy makers on the limits and
possibilities of various reform strategies and complements other works about
policy reform in the region (Grindle and Thomas 1991; Grindle 2004; 2000;
1996). First, my findings point to the limitations of universal reform mod-
els that disregard the political and economic context in which state agencies
operate. More broadly, these findings point to the limitations of technocratic
reform strategies in social policy sectors in general. Second, technical institu-
tion building is costly, but the payoffs for legitimacy and sustainability in the
long term are considerable.
   One lesson of my findings is well known by reform teams: some state policy
areas are more difficult to change than are others or, considered from another
angle, some reformers are more vulnerable than are others. Reformists in
policy areas where the factors identified in my theory are favorable have a
greater chance of succeeding, as they enjoy more space to act strategically,
are informally protected from political pressures, and have many more allies
to support them. On the contrary, technical reform teams in sectors where
these conditions are unfavorable face stronger constraints. Assuming the same
reform strategy can succeed across all state policy areas may produce goals
that are impossible for some reform teams to achieve because of the tighter
limits they face.
   In fact, my theory makes quite pessimistic predictions about the chances of
reforming those policy areas where the first two factors are unfavorable for
autonomy. To begin with, even starting reforms in these policy areas is difficult
due to a lack of political urgency. Even if reform teams advance new policies,
they run a higher risk of reversal. Experts in these policy areas lack powerful
164                              Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

allies that can limit political intrusion, and politicians can intervene with few
consequences for themselves. Although reform teams may achieve important
reforms on paper, the implementation and sustainability of those reforms is
considerably more difficult.
    For example, my health policy episodes suggest the limitations of World
Bank strategies to improve health care by strengthening patients’ associations
(World Bank 2004; Reuben and Belsky 2006). Recipients of health care ser-
vices in the region tend to be poor and lacking information. As such, they are
not strong enough to counterbalance political interests in the way powerful
stakeholders do in economic policy areas. These strategies are certainly right
to suggest fostering constituencies that can lobby against reform reversals and
for better policy. Creating stakeholders through policy making is an option for
reform teams that want to make new policies resilient. Yet these new stake-
holders need to be powerful enough to oppose politicians in order to guar-
antee the stability of new policies and institutions, which may surpass what
reforms teams can do (Graham et al. 1999, footnote 26). As other authors have
highlighted, a well-organized civil society and political actors on the demand
side of policy are crucial to achieving good policy outcomes (Evans 2010,
48–50; O’Donnell 1996, 6).
    One obvious lesson for policy makers is that properly understanding these
limitations allows them to be more aware of the obstacles they face and more
realistic about reform strategies. However, there is a more fundamental lesson:
technically trained individuals in government may not suffice to conduct broad
and sustainable reforms in several policy areas of Latin American states; poli-
tics are also crucial. Without solid political support to overcome barriers, and
lacking strong stakeholders demanding better policy and opposing particular
interests, thorough reforms are unlikely no matter how competent the reform
team is. Strong political coalitions and societal allies that increase the need for
better policy outcomes are critical to making technocratic solutions relevant,
legitimate, and thus more likely to persist. Although experts are frequently
allergic to politics and act to insulate themselves from other actors in order to
advance their reforms, they paradoxically seem to need politics in order to suc-
ceed in these less likely policy areas.
    A second important lesson is that there are significant payoffs for institution
building. Chapter 4 shows the long-term benefits of strategies to institutional-
ize professionalism in economic policy making in Colombia. These economic
experts invested considerable resources to support the stability, reproduction,
and training of technocrats through building institutions, which have proven
crucial to technocratic continuity. Nowadays, experts themselves act as a sup-
port group for technocrats in the public sphere.
    The contrast with the Peruvian case is revealing. There, economic experts
easily achieved control over the MEF and, partly as a result, did not pursue
similar strategies to institutionalize technical reproduction in the state and
society. In MEF, there are no state-sponsored incentives for training future
Conclusion                                                                    165

generations of experts. Technocrats are linked to few think tanks (the Centro
de Investigación de la Universidad del Pacífico, CIUP, Grupo de Estudios del
Desarrollo, GRADE, and APOYO) but mostly occupy private sector positions
when they leave the state. As such, experts’ power is not rooted in civil soci-
ety or in academic institutions like those the Colombian technocracy built. By
lacking similar exit options and a technical environment that values academic
achievements and research, Peruvian experts end up more closely associated to,
and dependent on, business actors. Consequently, they remain more vulnerable
to abrupt political changes, as their proximity to business makes técnicos easier
to delegitimize.
   It seems wise for public policy makers interested in professionalizing their
policy areas to invest resources in creating enduring mechanisms that pro-
mote stability, reproduction, and continuity, as economic technocrats did in
Colombia. The Colombian episode shows how, although costly and demand-
ing, these strategies offer good results for technical continuity in the state over
the medium term. In conclusion, this work provides some lessons to policy
makers about the challenges, limitations, and possibilities they face when
reforming the state.


Technocrats, Democracy, and Beyond
The early literature on technocrats in the region claimed that experts had a
“natural” affinity for authoritarian regimes (O’Donnell 1973; Collier 1979).
Experts’ insulated policy style and preference for top-down reforms, made them
seem the perfect complement for regimes that based their power on the absence
of deliberative processes. In the nineties, scholars questioned this argument
by stressing that experts were also important actors in democracies (Centeno
and Silva 1998; Domínguez 1997). This second group of authors concluded
that there was no natural link between experts and a particular regime type.
Experts were and always would be important actors in Latin America, whether
under dictatorship or democracy.
   This book supports this conclusion: experts remain relevant actors in Latin
American democracies. Técnicos’ power was not tied to authoritarian regimes,
and they can still exercise significant influence in democracies. In fact, experts’
power under democracy is less precarious, because it is not dependent on a sin-
gle military leader or small junta as it usually was under authoritarian regimes.
Their continuity is not questioned when these regimes fall and remains stable
across presidential terms. There is no doubt that technocrats have gained sta-
bility across the region in democratic times.
   Nonetheless, the question about the compatibility of experts’ power and
democratic politics remains relevant today. As mentioned in the introduction,
various authors have warned about the dangers autonomous technocrats pre-
sent to democracy in Latin America (Centeno 1993; Conaghan and Malloy
1994; Teichman 1997; Centeno and Silva 1998). These authors perceived
166                              Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

technocratic influence as limiting democratic politics in the region: citizens
may elect governments according to their preferences, but policy outputs are
controlled by technocrats (or, in some accounts, the business actors supporting
them). In these accounts, experts’ policy choices are insulated and respond more
to technical preferences than to democratic processes. As such, these choices
can produce social costs by disregarding political consequences or pushing
forward development projects without evaluating their broader political and
social consequences. Furthermore, political bodies lack the technical capacity
to monitor experts in economic institutions (Corrales 2011). Some authors
even described political regimes in Latin America as “technocratic democra-
cies,” meaning that experts, for good or bad, had considerable power over
politics and policy making (Centeno and Silva 1998).
   My findings speak to these debates about the power of non-elected actors
over democratic politicians. In regard to democratic accountability and the
influence of experts, my results suggest some serious shortcomings of Latin
American democracies. The episodes show that political bodies frequently lack
the ability to match technocrats’ expertise. As different instances in this book
show, meaningful policies are designed and implemented by experts without
elected officials fully understanding their content. Furthermore, in the absence
of strong democratic stakeholders, such as political parties or civil society asso-
ciations, economic experts end up being more responsive to stakeholders such
as business actors and IFIs. These powerful actors’ preferences weigh more
than other social demands that may not reach experts but are still very urgent
for the population.
   This image of a strong technocracy that largely dictates policy making is
more accurate in economic policy than in other policy areas where experts lack
similar power over elected politicians. Technocrats’ independence in the health
sector comes from not only their superior expertise but also careful maneu-
vering to prevent political backlash. Economic technocrats have considerable
latitude to act on their own preferences, sometimes disregarding the desires of
their democratically elected superiors. Policy is decided within technical policy
areas rather than in dialogue with elected representatives. And experts’ prefer-
ences are frequently not aligned with electoral preferences.
   For the last decade, technocratic policy making in Peru has been several
steps closer to economic orthodoxy than what presidents promised on the
campaign trail. Presidents have bowed to technocracy, and by doing so, have
broken many of their campaign promises. As a result, electoral change has not
brought policy variation (Vergara 2012). Alan García ran a centrist campaign,
but his economic policy remained quite orthodox. More striking was Ollanta
Humala’s decision to maintain economic continuity after he promised to move
toward a less orthodox development model. Part of this economic continuity is
explained by the well-entrenched economic technocracy, which business actors
and investors perceive as a guarantee of market stability. Although politicians
in Colombia usually make campaign promises more in line with what experts
Conclusion                                                                       167

support, technocrats frequently limit democratically elected politicians who are
aiming to advance demands from their constituencies and generally maintain
a firm set of core policies from term to term. As in Peru, Colombian experts
have a closer relation with business than with other social sectors. The qua­
lity of these democracies where economic experts have amassed considerable
power is therefore questionable, as public policies – for good or for bad – do
not necessarily conform to the preferences of elected politicians and are more
responsive to some interests in society than to others.
    But there is another side to this democratic story. Although technocracies
may have undemocratic features that reduce democratic quality, experts may
be more responsive to citizens’ demands than are elected politicians. Elected
politicians are frequently unresponsive to citizens’ needs because their inter-
est in acquiring patronage resources and advancing particular interests leads
them to disregard public preferences. In countries with weak political parties
and amateur politicians, such lack of democratic accountability is likely to be
significant. As such, politicians also fail the test of democratic accountability.
In social policy sectors, for example, politicians pursuing patronage resources
and particular interests may create greater challenges in satisfying citizens’
demands than do insulated technocrats.
    In some respects, then, experts are salutary for a region characterized by patron-
age politics, regime instability, and weak bureaucracies. As Weber highlighted in
regard to bureaucracies, adequate organizational incentives and a lack of con-
cern for electoral politics turn bureaucrats into a positive counterweight against
politicians’ short-term electoral interests (Weber 1946). This book shows that
technocrats can sometimes have similar effects by restraining the patronage-
driven impulses of politicians and strengthening institutions in a region where
politicians are well known for their irresponsible policy making. Effective pro-
fessional bureaucracies may be the best solution for ambitious politicians in the
region, but in their absence, technocrats act as a “second best” option.
    As discussed throughout these chapters, experts are often the ones who ini-
tiate reform efforts. Health policy experts have advanced reforms in areas,
such as rural health care, that political leaders have largely ignored (Nelson
2004, 31). Similarly, economic technocrats have helped keep inflation under
control and maintain tight macroeconomic stability, which has been crucial
to legitimizing current democratic regimes. Furthermore, experts’ networks
are responsible for incorporating locally new development suggestions with
some quite positive outcomes. Those who exclusively focus on experts’ pol-
icy experiments that had poor outcomes should not forget other policies that
produced positive outcomes, which then diffused through technical networks.
Different works mention policy diffusion through high-ranking state actors
such as technocrats as an important mechanism of policy reform in the devel-
oping world (Weyland 2002a; Ewig 2010; Haggard and Kaufman 1995). As
part of international epistemic communities, technocrats are aware of reform
experiences around the world.
168                             Technocracy and Democracy in Latin America

   Recent works also point to the crucial role experts play in connecting
centers of knowledge such as universities and think tanks with the state (Santiso
and Whitehead 2006; Tanaka et al. 2011). Technocrats can enrich political
debate by bringing in the proposals of other experts outside the state. Further,
their proximity to new policy ideas allows technocrats to “import” this knowl-
edge to their countries. In these ways, technocrats provide support for political
stability and policy advancement in Latin American democracies.
   Of course, these benefits do not reduce the above mentioned democratic ten-
sion between insulated technocratic policies and elected politicians. But they
highlight that elected politicians are not always responsive to acute problems
in their societies and that experts can ameliorate this problem of democratic
accountability. A better democratic outcome will undoubtedly require stronger
representative institutions capable of matching experts’ power. At the same
time, higher quality democracies need more responsible politicians who con-
sider both the short- and long-term interests of their entire societies.
   These debates will continue in the following decades. As this book shows,
technocrats adjust well to regime changes and diverse political and economic
conditions. Due to the difficulties of civil service reform, the weakness of
regional bureaucracies that makes politicians seek experts’ advice and support
is not likely to change anytime soon (Grindle 2012). -Nothing indicates that
experts will not continue exercising significant power in Latin America for the
foreseeable future.
Bibliography




Abel, Christopher (1996). Ensayos de Historia de la Salud en Colombia, 1920–1990,
    Bogotá: Universidad Nacional/IEPRI.
Abusada, Roberto et al. (2000). “La Reforma Incompleta,” in Abusada et al. (Eds.), La
    Reforma Incompleta: Rescatando los Noventa, Lima: Centro de Investigación de
    la Universidad del Pacífico.
Ahumada, Consuelo (1996). El Modelo Neoliberal y Su Impacto en la Sociedad
    Colombiana, Bogotá: El Áncora Editores.
Alvarado Pérez, Betty, and Rony Lenz (2006). “Pro-poor Policies in the Peruvian Public
    Health Sector,” in Daniel Cotlear (Ed.), New Social Contract for Peru, Washington,
    DC: The World Bank.
Amadeo, Edward (Ed.) (1993). Estabilización y Reforma Estructural en América Latina,
    Bogotá: Fedesarrollo/Tercer Mundo Editores.
Ames, Barry (1987). Political Survival: Politicians and Public Policy in Latin America,
    Berkeley: University of California Press.
ANIF (2010). “Emergencia Social en Salud: ¿Acaso Es un Hecho Sobreviniente?”
    Informe Semanal, 1012: February.
  (2009). “Universalización de la Salud y Activismo Jurídico,” Informe Semanal, 993:
    September.
  (2008). “El Costo de la Universalización de la Salud en Colombia,” Informe Semanal,
    947: September.
Arce, Moisés (2006). Market Reform in Society: Post Crisis Politics and Economic
    Change in Authoritarian Peru, University Park: Pennsylvania State University
    Press.
Arenas, Roberto (1972). “Texto de la Conferencia Dictada por el Doctor Roberto
    Arenas Bonilla, Jefe del Departamento Nacional de Planeación, en el Salón Rojo
    del Hotel Tequendama,” Bogotá: DNP.
Arroyo, Juan (2001). Gobernabilidad en Salud en el Perú en los Noventa, Lima: MINSA,
    Oficina General de Epidemiología.
  (2000). Salud: La Reforma Silenciosa, Lima: Universidad Cayetano Heredia.
  (1999). “La Reforma del Sector Salud en el Perú, 1990–1998: En Busca de Nuevos
    Modelos de Política Social,” in Felipe Portocarrero (Ed.), Pobreza y Políticas

                                                                                  169
170                                                                    Bibliography

     Sociales en el Perú: Nuevos Aportes, Lima: Red para el Desarrollo de las Ciencias
     Sociales.
Babb, Sarah (2005). “Del Nacionalismo al Neoliberalismo: El Ascenso de los Nuevos
     Money Doctors en México,” in Jairo Estrada Álvarez (Ed.), Intelectuales,
     Tecnócratas, y Reformas Neoliberales en América Latina, Bogotá: Universidad
     Nacional de Colombia/Convenio Andrés Bello/Conciencias.
  (2001). Managing Mexico: Economists from Nationalism to Neoliberalism, Princeton:
     Princeton University Press.
Banco Interamericano de Desarrollo (1991). Progreso Económico y Social en América
     Latina, Washington, DC: IDB.
Barnett, Michael N., and Martha Finnemore (1999). “The Politics, Power, and
     Pathologies of International Organizations,” International Organizations, 53:4
     (autumn), 699–732.
Bates, Robert H., and Anne O. Krueger (1993) “Generalizations arising from the
     Country Studies” in Robert H. Bates and Anne O. Krueger (Eds.) Political and
     Economic Interactions in Economic Policy Reform, Cambridge: Blackwell.
Bell, Daniel (1973). The Coming of Post-Industrial Society: A Venture in Social
     Forecasting, New York: Basic Books.
Berry, Albert (1980). “The National Front and Colombia’s Economic Development,”
     in Albert Berry, Ronald G. Hellman, and Mauricio Solaun (Eds.), Politics of
     Compromise, New Brunswick: Transaction Books.
Berry, Albert, and Mauricio Solaun (1980). “Notes toward an Interpretation of the
     National Front,” in Albert Berry, Ronald G. Hellman, and Mauricio Solaun (Eds.),
     Politics of Compromise, New Brunswick: Transaction Books.
Berry, Albert, and Francisco Thoumi (1977). “Import Substitution and Beyond:
     Colombia,” World Development, 5:1/2, 89–109.
Bersch, Katherine, Sergio Praça, and Michael Taylor (2012). “An Archipelago of
     Excellence? Autonomous State Capacity among Brazilian Federal Agencies,”
     unpublished working paper, February 2012.
Biglaiser, Glen (2002). Guardians of the Nation? Economists, Generals, and Economic
     Reform in Latin America, Notre Dame: Notre Dame University Press.
Bill Chávez, Rebeca (2004). The Rule of Law in Nascent Democracies: Judicial Politics
     in Argentina, Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Botero, Rodrigo (2010). “Modernidad, Tecnocracia, y Democracia Liberal,” Coyuntura
     Económica, 2010:1, 206–210.
  (2005). “Una Nota sobre la Tecnocracia Colombiana,” Coyuntura Económica,
     2005:2, 17–24.
  (2004). El Discreto Encanto de la Social Democracia, Bogotá: EAFIT.
  (1995). “Reflexiones Acerca del Origen y Primeras Actividades de Fedesarrollo,”
     in Héctor Gómez Buendía (Ed.), Economía y Opinión, 25 Años de Fedesarrollo,
     Bogotá: Editor Tercer Mundo Editores, Colciencias.
  (1976). Memorias de Hacienda 1974–1976. Bogotá: Ministerio de Hacienda.
Boylan, Delia (1998). “Preemptive Strike: Central Bank Reform in Chile’s Transition
     from Authoritarian Rule,” Comparative Politics, 30:4, 443–462.
Bradbury, Robert Carl (1975). Planning for Health in Colombia: Confronting Theory
     and Practice, Unpublished PhD Book. Ohio State University.
Braun, Miguel et al. (2007). “Caso de Estudio Colombiano: Fedesarrollo,” CIPPEC.
Bibliography                                                                        171

Brint, Steven (1990). “Rethinking the Policy Influence of Experts: From General
     Characterizations to Analysis of Variation,” Sociological Forum, 5:3, 361–385.
Caballero Argáez, Carlos (2008). “Las Etapas de la Planeación en Colombia,” Planeación
     y Desarrollo, XXXIX:2, (July–December), 56–65.
Cardoso, Fernando Henrique, and Enzo Faletto (1979). Dependency and Development
     in Latin America, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Carey, John, and Matthew Shugart (1995). “Incentives to Cultivate a Personal Vote.”
     Electoral Studies, 14: 4, 417–439.
Carpenter, Daniel (2001). The Forging of Bureaucratic Autonomy: Reputations,
     Networks, and Policy Innovation in Executive Agencies, Princeton: Princeton
     University Press.
Centeno, Miguel Ángel (1994). Democracy within Reason: Technocratic Revolution in
     Mexico, University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.
  (1993). “The New Leviathan: The Dynamics and Limits of Technocracy,” Theory and
     Society, 22:3, 307–335.
Centeno, Miguel Ángel, and Patricio Silva (1998). “The Politics of Expertise in Latin
     America: Introduction,” in Miguel A. Centeno and Patricio Silva (Eds.), The Politics
     of Expertise in Latin America, New York: Macmillan Press.
Cepeda Ulloa, Fernando (1994). Dirección Política de la Reforma Económica en
     Colombia, Bogotá: FONADE, DNP.
Cepeda Ulloa, Fernando, and Christopher Mitchell (1980). “The Trend toward
     Technocracy,” in Albert Berry, Ronald Hellman, and Mauricio Solaún (Eds.),
     Politics of Compromise: Coalition Government in Colombia, New Brunswick:
     Transaction Books.
Chang, Kelly H., Rui J. P. De Figueiredo, and Barry Weingast (2000). “Rational Choice
     Theories of Bureaucratic Control and Performance,” in William F. Shugart II and
     Laura Razzolini (Eds.), The Elgar Companion to Public Choice, Cheltenham:
     Edward Elgar Press.
Chon, Enrique, Vilma Montañez, and Janice Seinfeld (2011). La Salud que los
     Peruanos Queremos, Lima: Centro de Investigación de la Universidad del
     Pacífico.
Clavijo, Sergio, and Maria Olga Peña (2010). “Reformas al Régimen de Salud: Entre la
     Emergencia Social y el Déficit Estructural,” ADEGOB, 5: (September), 4–8.
Collier, David (Ed.) (1979). The New Authoritarianism in Latin America, Princeton:
     Princeton University Press.
Collier, David, and Ruth Berins Collier (1991). Shaping the Political Arena: Critical
     Junctures, the Labor Movement, and Regime Dynamics in Latin America, Notre
     Dame: University of Notre Dame Press.
Colombia Health Sector Reform Project (1996). Report on Colombia Health Sector
     Reform and Proposed Master Implementation Plan, Boston: Harvard School of
     Public Health.
Conaghan, Catherine M. (1998). “Stars of the Crisis: The Ascent of the Economists in
     Peru,” in Miguel A. Centeno and Patricio Silva (Eds.), The Politics of Expertise in
     Latin America, New York: Macmillan Press.
Conaghan, Catherine M., and James M. Malloy (1994). Unsettling Statecraft:
     Democracy and Neoliberalism in the Central Andes, Pittsburgh: University of
     Pittsburgh Press.
172                                                                    Bibliography

Congreso de la República del Perú (2001). Comisión Investigadora sobre los Delitos
    Económicos y Financieros Cometidos entre 1990–2001. Reporte de Investigación
    (Agosto–Diciembre 2001). http://www.congreso.gob.pe/comisiones/2002/CIDEF/
    preliminares/infopre1.pdf.
Corporación para el Fomento de las Investigaciones Económicas (CORP) (1972).
    Controversia sobre el Plan de Desarrollo. Bogotá: Editorial La Oveja Negra.
Corrales, Javier (2011). “Technocratic Policy Making and Parliamentary Accountability
    in Argentina, 1983–2002,” Democracy, Governance, and Human Rights Program
    Paper N. 13, September 2004.
Corrales, Javier, and Michael Penfold (2011). Dragon in the Tropics. Hugo Chávez
    and the Political Economy of Revolution in Venezuela, Washington: Brookings
    Institution Press.
Cortázar, Juan Carlos (2006). La Reforma de la Administración Pública Peruana
    (1990–1997), Lima: Instituto de Políticas Sociales.
Cueto, Marcos (2004). “Origins of Primary Health Care and Selective Primary Health
    Care,” American Journal of Public Health, 94:11, 1864–1874.
Dancourt, Óscar et al. (1990). “Una Propuesta de Reforma Monetaria para Acabar con
    la Hiperinflación,” Serie Documentos de Trabajo N. 90, Lima: Departamento de
    Economía, Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú.
Dargent, Eduardo (2008). “Islas de Eficiencia y Reforma del Estado: Ministerios de
    Economía y Salud, 1990–2008,” Consorcio de Investigación Económica y Social
    (CIES), http://www.cies.org.pe/node/1598
Dávila Ladrón de Guevara, Andrés and Natalia Delgado Varela (2002).“La Metamorfosis
    del Sistema Político Colombiano: ¿Clientelismo de Mercado o Nuevas Formas de
    Intermediación? in Francisco Gutierrez (Ed.), ¿Degradaciòn o Cambio? Evolución
    del Sistema Político Colombiano, Bogotá: Norma.
De Brigard, Alberto (1995). “El Papel de Francisco Ortega en la Independencia de
    la Banca Central Colombiana,” in Roberto Steiner (Comp.), La Autonomía del
    Banco de la República: Economía Política de la Reforma, Bogotá: TM Editores/
    Fedesarrollo.
Departamento Nacional de Planeación (1974). La Política de Salud, Bogotá: DNP/
    Osprey Impresores
Díaz-Alejandro, Carlos F. (1977). Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development:
    Colombia (A Special Conference Series on Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic
    Development, Volume X), New York and London: National Bureau of Economic
    Research.
  (1973). El Cambio de una Política de Sustitución de Importaciones a una de
    Promoción de Exportaciones, Bogotá: Fedesarrollo.
Dix, Robert (1967). Colombia: the Political Dimension of Change, New Haven: Yale
    University Press.
Domínguez, Jorge (Ed.) (1997). “Technopols: Freeing Politics and Markets in Latin
    America in the 1990s,” University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.
Drake, Paul (1989). The Money Doctors in the Andes: the Kemmerer Missions 1923–
    1933, Durham: Duke University Press.
Durand, Francisco (2006). “El Problema del Fortalecimiento Institucional Empresarial,”
    in John Crabtree (Ed.), Construir Instituciones: Democracia, Desarrollo, y
    Desigualdad en el Perú desde 1980, Lima: Instituto de Estudios Peruanos.
Bibliography                                                                          173

  (2005). “Dinámica Política de la Corrupción y Participación Empresarial,” in
     Felipe Portocarrero (Ed.), El Pacto Infame: La Persistencia de la Corrupción en
     el Perú. Lima: Red para el Desarrollo de las Ciencias Sociales en el Perú (IEP, UP,
     PUCP).
Echebarria, Koldo (2006). “Introducción,” in Koldo Echebarria (Ed.), Informe sobre
     la Situación del Servicio Civil en América Latina, Washington, DC: Banco
     Interamericano de Desarrollo.
Edwards, Sebastián, and Roberto Steiner (2008). La Revolución Incompleta: Las
     Reformas de Gaviria, Bogotá: Norma.
ENAHO (2012). Encuesta Nacional de Hogares. Instituto Nacional de Estadística e
     Informática. http://www.inei.gob.pe/
Escobar, María Luisa et al. (2009). “Colombia: After a Decade of Health System
     Reform,” in Amanda Glassman et al. (Eds.), From Few to Many: Ten Years of
     Health Insurance Expansion in Colombia, Washington: IDB/Brookings.
Espinoza, Rubén (1998). Análisis del Proceso de Reforma en el Perú. Informe del
     Coordinador del Componente de Reestructuración Sectorial del Programa de
     Fortalecimiento de Servicios de Salud. Noviembre de 1995–Julio de 1998, Lima:
     MINSA/PFSS.
Estrada Álvarez, Jairo (2005). “Élites Intelectuales y Producción de Política Económica
     en Colombia,” in Jairo Estrada Álvarez (Ed.), Intelectuales, Tecnócratas, y Reformas
     Neoliberales en América Latina, Bogotá: Universidad Nacional de Colombia/
     Convenio Andrés Bello/Conciencias.
  (2004). Construcción del Modelo Neoliberal en Colombia 1970–2004, Bogotá:
     Ediciones Aurora.
Evans, Peter (2010). “Constructing the 21st Century Developmental State: Potentialities
     and Pitfalls,” in Omano Edigheji (Ed.), Constructing a Democratic Developmental
     State in South Africa: Potentials and Challenges, Cape Town: HSRC Press, 37–58.
  (1992). “The State as Problem and Solution: Predation, Embedded Autonomy, and
     Structural Change,” in Stephan Haggard and Robert R. Kaufman (Eds.), The
     Politics of Adjustment, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
  (1979). Dependent Development. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Ewig, Christina (2010). Second-Wave Neoliberalism: Gender, Race, and Health Sector
     Reform in Peru, University Park: Pennsylvania State Press.
  (2004). “Piecemeal but Innovative: Health Sector Reform in Peru,” in Robert R.
     Kaufman and Joan M. Nelson (Eds.), Crucial Needs, Weak Incentives: Social
     Sector Reform, Democratization, and Globalization in Latin America. Baltimore:
     Woodrow Wilson Center and Johns Hopkins University Press, 2004.
  (1999). “Democracia Diferida: Un Análisis del Proceso de Reforma del Sector Salud,”
     in Felipe Portocarrero (Ed.), Pobreza y Políticas Sociales en el Perú: Nuevos Aportes,
     Lima: Red para el Desarrollo de las Ciencias Sociales.
Falleti, Tulia (2010). Decentralization and Subnational Politics in Latin America,
     Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fedesarrollo (2010). “El Sistema de Salud, la Equidad, las Finanzas Públicas y la
     Emergencia Social: ¿Vamos por el Camino Correcto?” Tendencia Económica,
     N. 93.
  (2009). Informe: Descentralización, el Financiamiento de la Salud y la Educación y los
     Departamentos, Bogotá: Fedesarrollo, Federación Nacional de Departamentos.
174                                                                        Bibliography

Flórez Enciso, Luis Bernardo (2010). “Colombia: Economics, Economic Policy, and
     Economists,” in Veronica Montecinos and John Markoff (Eds.), Economists in the
     Americas, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Francke, Pedro (2001). “Lineamientos en Políticas de Salud (2001–2006),” in Pedro
     Francke (Ed.) Políticas de Salud 2001–2006, Lima: Consorcio de Investigación
     Económica y Social, 21–35.
Franco, Rolando (1996). “Los Paradigmas de la Política Social en América Latina,”
     Revista de la CEPAL, 58, 9–22.
Frank, André Gunder (1966). “The Development of Underdevelopment.” Monthly
     Review, 17 (September), 17–31.
Frieden, Jeffry (1985). Debt, Development, and Democracy: Modern Political Economy
     and Latin America, 1965–1985, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Freidson, Eliot (1984). “Are the Professions Necessary?” in Thomas Haskell (Ed.), The
     Authority of Experts: Studies in History and Theory, Bloomington, IN: Indiana
     University Press.
Gaviria, Alejandro, Carlos Medina, Carolina Mejía, David McKenzie, and Rodrigo
     Soares (2006). “Assessing Health Reform in Colombia: From Theory to Practice,”
     Economía, 7:1 (Fall), 29–72.
Geddes, Barbara (1995). “The Politics of Economic Liberalization,” (Review), Latin
     American Research Review, 30:2, 195–214.
  (1994). Politician’s Dilemma: Building State Capacity in Latin America, Berkeley:
     University of California Press.
  (1990). “Building ‘State’ Autonomy in Brazil, 1930–1964,” Comparative Politics,
     22:2, 217–235.
Ghezzi, Piero, and José Gallardo (2013). ¿Qué se Puede hacer con el Perú? Ideas para
     Sostener el Crecimiento Económico en el Largo Plazo, Lima: Universidad del
     Pacífico, Fondo Editorial de la Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú.
Giedion, Ursula, Luis Morales, and Olga Acosta (2000). “Desarrollo Institucional del
     Sector Salud en Bogotá,” Coyuntura Social, 23, 57–81.
Gingerich, Daniel (2010). “Bolivia: Traditional Parties, the State, and the Toll of
     Corruption,” in Stephen Morris and Charles Blake (Eds.), Corruption and Politics
     in Latin America: National and Regional Dynamics, London: Lynne Rienner
     Publishers.
Ginsburg, Tom (2003). Judicial Review in New Democracies: Constitutional Courts in
     East Asia, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Glassman, Amanda et al. (Eds.) (2009). From Few to Many, Ten Years of Health
     Insurance Expansion in Colombia, Washington: IDB/Brookings.
González-Rossetti, Alejandra, and Patricia Ramírez (2000). Enhancing the Feasibility
     of Health Reform: the Colombian Case, Latin America and the Caribbean Health
     Sector Reform Initiative N. 39, Harvard School of Public Health.
Graham, Carol, Merilee Grindle, Eduardo Lora, and Jessica Seddon (1999). Improving
     the Odds: Political Strategies for Institutional Reform in Latin America, Washington:
     Inter-American Development Bank.
Gray Molina, George (2007). “El Reto Posneoliberal de Bolivia,” Nueva Sociedad,
     N209, May–June 2007, 118–129.
Gray Molina, George, Ernesto Yépez de Rada, and Ernesto Yañez (1999). La Economía
     Política de las Reformas Institucionales en Bolivia, Washington: IADB.
Bibliography                                                                        175

Grindle, Merilee (2012). Jobs for the Boys, Cambridge and London: Harvard University
    Press.
  (2004). Despite the Odds: The Contentious Politics of Education Reforms, Princeton
    and Oxford: Princeton University Press.
  (2000). Audacious Reforms: Institutional Invention and Democracy in Latin America,
    Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
  (1996). Challenging the State: Crisis and Innovation in Latin America and Africa,
    London: Cambridge University Press.
  (1977). “Power, Expertise, and the ‘Técnico’: Suggestions from a Mexican Case
    Study,” The Journal of Politics 39:2,399–426.
Grindle, Merilee, and John W. Thomas (1991). Public Choice and Policy Change: The
    Political Economy of Reform in Developing Countries, Baltimore and London:
    Johns Hopkins University Press.
Grupo de Economía de la Salud (2007). “Reforma a la Regulación en Salud en Colombia:
    Del Consejo Nacional a la Comisión de Regulación,” Observatorio de la Seguridad
    Social, Universidad de Antioquia, 6:16, 1–12.
Gutiérrez Sanín, Francisco (2007). Lo que el Viento se Llevó: Los Partidos Políticos y la
    Democracia en Colombia (1958–2006), Bogotá: Norma.
  (1997). “La Experiencia de Fedesarrollo,” in Hernando Gomez and Hernán Jaramillo
    (Eds.) 27 Formas de Hacer Ciencia en América Latina, Bogota: Tercer Mundo,
    Colciencias.
Gutiérrez Sanín, Francisco, and Andrés Dávila (2000). “Paleontólogos o Politólogos:
    ¿Qué Podemos Decir Hoy sobre los Dionosurios?” in Revista de Estudios Sociales,
    6: (May), 39–50.
Haas, Peter M. (1992). “Introduction: Epistemic Communities and International Policy
    Coordination,” International Organization, 46:1, 1–35.
Haggard, Stephan, and Robert Kaufman (1995). The Political Economy of Democratic
    Transitions, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Hagopian, Frances (1994). “Traditional Politics against State Transformation in Brazil,”
    in Joel Migdal, Atul Kohli, and Vivienne Shue (Eds.), State Power and Social Forces,
    Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hall, Peter (1993). “Policy Paradigms, Social Learning, and the State. The Case
    of Economic Policy Making in Britain,” Comparative Politics, 25:(April),
    275–296.
Halliday, Terence (1987). Beyond Monopoly: Lawyers, State Crisis, and Professional
    Empowerment, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hartlyn, Jonathan (1988). The Politics of Coalitional Rule in Colombia, Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press.
Haskell, Thomas (1984). “Introduction,” in Thomas Haskell (Ed.), The Authority of
    Experts: Studies in History and Theory, Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
    Press.
Hershberg, Eric (2006). “Technocrats, Citizens, and Second Generation Reforms:
    Colombia’s Andean Malaise,” in Eric Hershberg and Paul Drake (Eds.), State and
    Society in Conflict: Comparative Perspectives on the Andean Crisis, Pittsburgh:
    University of Pittsburgh Press.
Hildebrandt, Mary, and Merilee Grindle (1997). “Building Sustainable Capacity in
    the Public Sector. What Can Be Done?” in Merilee Grindle (Ed.), Getting Good
176                                                                        Bibliography

    Government: Capacity Building in the Public Sectors of Developing Countries,
    Cambridge, MA: Harvard Institute for International Development.
Hirschman, Albert (1970). Exit, Voice, Loyalty: Responses to Decline in Firms,
    Organizations, and States, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hommes, Rudolf (1995). “El Proyecto del Gobierno y Su Evolución durante la
    Constituyente,” in Roberto Steiner (Comp.), La Autonomía del Banco de la
    República: Economía Política de la Reforma. Bogotá: TM Editores/Fedesarrollo.
  (1988). “La Insoportable Oscuridad del Emisor,” Is Estrategia Económica y Financiera,
    September No. 25, pp. 27–31.
Huber, John D., and Charles R. Shipan (2002). Deliberate Discretion? The Institutional
    Foundations of Bureaucratic Autonomy, New York: Cambridge University
    Press.
Huber, Evelyne (1995). “Assessments of State Strength,” in Peter Smith (Ed.), Latin
    America in Comparative Perspective: New Approaches to Methods and Analysis,
    Boulder, San Francisco, Oxford: Westview Press.
IOP (2013). Informe de Estudio: Conflictos Sociales y Representación Política, Lima:
    Instituto de Opinión Pública-PUCP.
Izquierda Unida (1990). Plan de Gobierno de Izquierda Unida (1990–1995), Lima: no
    press.
  (1985) Plan de Gobierno (1985–1990), Lima: no press.
Jaramillo, Miguel, and Sandro Parodi (2004). “El Seguro Escolar Gratuito y el Seguro
    Materno Infantil: Análisis de Su Incidencia e Impacto sobre el Acceso a los Servicios
    de Salud y sobre la Equidad en el Acceso,” Documento de trabajo No. 46. Lima:
    GRADE.
Johnson, Chalmers A. (1995). Japan: Who Governs? The Rise of the Developmental
    State, New York: W. W. Norton.
Johnson, Matthew (forthcoming). “The Political Logic of Renters Insurance,”
    Unpublished article.
Juárez, Carlos E. (1995). The Political Economy of Economic Policy Reform in
    Colombia: Technocratic Bureaucracy and Business-Government Relations, 1966–
    1992. Unpublished PhD Book, University of California, Los Angeles.
  (1993a). “Trade and Development Policies in Colombia: Export Promotion and
    Outward Orientation, 1967–1992,” Studies in Comparative Political Development,
    28:3, 67–97.
  (1993b).“Economía Política y Apertura Económica: Desarrollo Económico y Comercio
    Exterior en Colombia, 1967–1991.” Monograph Series N. 33 Departamento de
    Administración, Bogotá: Universidad de los Andes.
Kahler, Miles (1992). “External Influence, Conditionality, and the Politics of Adjustment,”
    in Stephan Haggard and Robert R. Kaufman (Eds.), The Politics of Adjustment,
    Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Kaufmann, Daniel, Massino Mastruzzi, and Diego Zavaleta (2003). “Sustained
    Macroeconomic Reforms, Tepid Growth: A Governance Puzzle in Bolivia?” in:
    Dani Rodrik (Ed.), In Search of Prosperity: Analytical Narratives on Economic
    Growth, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Kaufman, Robert R., and Joan M. Nelson (Eds.) (2004). Crucial Needs, Weak Incentives:
    Social Sector Reform, Democratization, and Globalization in Latin America.
    Baltimore: Woodrow Wilson Center and Johns Hopkins University Press.
Bibliography                                                                        177

Kitschelt, Herbert and Steven I. Wilkinson (2007). “Citizen-Politician Linkages: An
     Introducion”, in: Herbert Kitschelt and Steven I. Wilkinson (Eds.), Patrons, Clients
     and Policies, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kline, Harvey (1983). Colombia: Portrait of Unity and Diversity, Boulder, Colorado:
     Westview Press.
Koivumaeki, Riita Ilona (2010). “Business, Economic Experts, and Conservative Party
     Building in El Salvador,” Journal of Politics in Latin America, 2:1, 79–106.
Krasner, Stephen D. (1984). “Approaches to the State: Alternative Conceptions and
     Historical Dynamics,” Comparative Politics, 16:2, 223–246.
Leal Buitrago, Francisco, and Andrés Dávila (1990). Clientelismo: El Sistema Político
     y Su Expresión Regional, Bogotá: Tercer Mundo Editores, IEPRI, Universidad
     Nacional de Colombia.
Leiteritz, Ralf (2010). Sustaining Open Capital Accounts. International Norms and
     Domestic Institutions: A Comparison between Perú and Colombia, Unpublished
     PhD Book, London School of Economics.
Levitsky, Steven, and María Victoria Murillo (2009). “Variation in Institutional
     Strength,” The Annual Review of Political Science, 11, 115–133.
Levitsky, Steven, and Lucan Way (2010). Competitive Authoritarianism, Cambridge:
     Cambridge University Press.
Leys, Collin (1996). The Rise and Fall of Development Theory, Oxford: James Curry.
Lleras Restrepo, Carlos (1965). “Los Programas de la Gran Transformación,” in
     Discursos, Bogotá: no press.
Londoño, Juan Luis, and Julio Frenk (1997). “Structured Pluralism: Toward an
     Innovative Model for Health System Reform in Latin America,” Health Policy,
     41:1, 1–36.
Lora, Eduardo (Ed.) (1991). Apertura y Crecimiento: El Reto de los Noventa, Bogotá:
     Fedesarrollo/Tercer Mundo.
Lora, Eduardo, and Cristina Lanzetta (Comps.) (1995). El Salto Social en Discusión,
     Bogotá: Fedesarrollo.
Lora, Eduardo, and Carlos Scartascini (Eds.) (2009). Consecuencias Imprevistas de la
     Constitución de 1991: La Influencia de la Política en las Políticas Económicas,
     Bogotá, Alfaomega/Fedesarrollo.
Lowenthal, Abraham (Ed.) (1975). The Peruvian Experiment: Continuity and Change
     under Military Rule, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Madrid, Raúl (2008). “The Rise of Ethnopopulism in Latin America,” World Politics,
     60: 3, 475–508.
Magaloni, Beatriz (2006). Voting for Autocracy: Hegemonic Party Survival and Its
     Demise in Mexico, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
  (2003). “Authoritarianism, Democracy, and the Supreme Court: Horizontal Exchange
     and the Rule of Law in Mexico,” in Scott Mainwaring and Christopher Welna
     (Eds.), Democratic Accountability in Latin America, Oxford: Oxford University
     Press, 267–305.
Mahoney, James (2001). The Legacies of Liberalism: Path Dependence and Political
     Regimes in Central America, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Mahoney, James, and Diana Rodríguez-Franco (forthcoming). “Dependency Theory,”
     Prepared for inclusion in the Handbook on the Politics of Development, edited by
     Carol Lancaster and Nicolas van de Walle.
178                                                                    Bibliography

Malloy, James (1992). “El Problema de la Gobernabilidad en Bolivia, Perú, y Ecuador”
    in René Mayorga (Ed.) Democracia y Gobernabilidad: América Latina, Caracas:
    Nueva Sociedad.
Malpica, Carlos (1985). La Alternativa de la Izquierda: Presupuesto 1985, Lima:
    Servicios Populares.
Mann, Michael (1984). “The Autonomous Power of the State: Its Origins, Mechanisms,
    and Results,” Archives Européennes de Sociologie, 25, 185–213.
Mares, David R. (1993). “State Leadership in Economic Policy: A Collective Action
    Framework with a Colombian Case,” Comparative Politics, 24:4, 455–473.
Mauceri, Philip (1995). “State Reform, Coalitions, and the Neoliberal Autogolpe in
    Peru,” Latin American Research Review, 30:1, 7–37.
Mayorga, Fernando (2007). Encrucijadas: Ensayos sobre Democracia y Reforma Estatal
    en Bolivia. La Paz: Editorial Gente Común, CESU-UMSS.
 (2002). “Sistema de Partidos y Neopopulismo en Bolivia,” in Marcelo Cavarozzi and
    Juan Manuel Abal (Eds.), El Asedio a la Política. Los Partidos Latinoamericanos
    en la Era Neoliberal, Rosario: Homo Sapiens, 2002, 187–210.
McCubbins, Mathew D., and Thomas Schwartz (1984). “Congressional Oversight
    Overlooked: Policy Patrol vs. Fire Alarms,” American Journal of Political Science,
    28, 165–179.
McGuire, James W. (2010). Wealth, Health, and Democracy in East Asia and Latin
    America, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 (2001). “Social Policy and Mortality Decline in East Asia and Latin America,” World
    Development, 29:10, 1673–1697.
MEF (2006). La Reforma Constitucional sobre Pensiones: Descripción de la Buena
    Práctica. Unpublished draft document.
 (2001). “Transparencia Económica y Fiscal.” Lima: Ministerio de Economía y
    Finanzas.
Meisel Roca, Adolfo (1997). “¿Por Qué No Hay Hiperinflación en Colombia?” Ensayos
    de Política Económica, No. 32, 97–137.
Mesa-Lago, Carmelo (1996). La Reforma del Sistema de Salud en Perú: Evaluación de
    Documentos y Recomendaciones. Consultoría Internacional con el Programa de
    Fortalecimiento de Servicios de Salud del MINSA. Lima, 14–20 de Julio, Lima:
    MINSA/PFSS.
Meynaud, Jean (1969). Technocracy, New York: Free Press.
Miller, Gary, and Terry Moe (1983). “Bureaucrats, Legislators, and the Size of
    Government,” American Political Science Review, 77: (June), 297–322.
Ministerio de Salud (1994). “Recuento del Diseño y Trámite de la Reforma en Seguridad
    Social en Salud,” Bogotá: Ministerio de Salud.
Ministerio de Salud, DNP (1990). La Salud en Colombia. Insumo para la Ley 10 de
    1990. Bogotá: DNP/Ministerio de Salud.
MINSA (2001). Memoria Ministerial: La Recuperación de la Democracia. 25 de
    Noviembre 2000–26 de Julio 2001. Lima: Ministerio de Salud.
 (1996). El Desafío del Cambio del Milenio: Un Sector Salud con Equidad, Eficiencia,
    y Calidad. Lineamientos de Política de Salud 1995–2000. Lima: MINSA.
 (1990a) Políticas y Plan de Salud, 90–95, Lima: MINSA.
 (1990b). Sistema Nacional Regionalizado Integrado en Salud, Lima: Ministerio de
    Salud.
Bibliography                                                                       179

Moe, Terry M. (2005). “Power and Political Institutions,” Perspectives on Politics, 3:2,
    215–233.
  (1990). “Political Institutions: The Neglected Side of the Story,” Journal of Law,
    Economics, and Organization, 6, 213–254.
  (1984). “The New Economics of Organization,” American Journal of Political Science,
    28 (November), 739–777.
Montecinos, Verónica (2005). “Nota sobre la Evolución e Influencia de la Tecnocracia
    Económica en Chile,” in Jairo Estrada Álvarez (Ed.), Intelectuales, Tecnócratas,
    y Reformas Neoliberales en América Latina, Bogotá: Universidad Nacional de
    Colombia/Convenio Andrés Bello/Conciencias.
  (1998). “Economists and Party Politics: Chilean Democracy in the Era of Markets,”
    in Miguel A. Centeno and Patricio Silva (Eds.), The Politics of Expertise in Latin
    America, New York: Macmillan Press.
Montecinos, Verónica, John Markoff, and María José Álvarez-Rivadulla (2010).
    “Economists in the Americas: Convergence, Divergence, and Connection,” in
    Verónica Montecinos and John Markoff (Eds.) Economists in the Americas,
    Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Montenegro, Armando (2010). “Presentación del Libro “El Bejuco de Tazán y Otras
    Disgresiones Tecnocráticas,” Coyuntura Económica, XL:1, 215–218.
Naranjo Velandia, Durfari, Jairo Humberto Restrepo Zea, and Sandra Rodríguez
    Acosta (2002). “Organismos Reguladores del Sistema de Salud Colombiano:
    Conformación, Funcionamiento y Responsabilidades,” Universidad de Antioquia.
    Centro de Investigaciones Económicas. Online at http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.
    de/857/
Nelkin, Dorothy (1975). “The Political Impact of Technical Expertise,” Social Studies of
    Science, 5: (February), 35–54.
Nelson, Joan (2004). “The Politics of Health Sector Reform: Cross National
    Comparisons,” in Robert R. Kaufman and Joan M. Nelson (Eds.), Crucial Needs,
    Weak Incentives: Social Sector Reform, Democratization, and Globalization in
    Latin America. Baltimore: Woodrow Wilson Center and Johns Hopkins University
    Press, 2004, 23–64.
  (1999). Reforming Health and Education: The World Bank, the IDB, and Complex
    Institutional Change, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Noriega, Gustavo (2010). Indec: Historia Íntima de una Estafa, Buenos Aires:
    Sudamericana.
North, Douglass (1995). “New Institutional Economics and Third World Development,”
    in Harris, John, Janet Hunter, and Colin Lewis (Eds.), The New Institutional
    Economics and Third World Development, London and New York: Routledge.
  (1990). Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance, New York:
    Cambridge University Press.
O’Brien, Philip J., and Jaqueline Rodick (1983). Chile, the Pinochet Decade: The Rise
    and Fall of the Chicago Boys, London: Latin American Bureau.
Ocampo, José Antonio, and Eduardo Sarmiento (Eds.) (1987). ¿Hacia un Nuevo Modelo
    de Desarrollo? Bogotá: Fedesarrollo/Tercer Mundo Editores.
O’Donnell, Guillermo (1996). “Poverty and Inequality in Latin America: Some Political
    Reflections,” Working Paper N. 225. Kellogg Institute for International Studies,
    University of Notre Dame.
180                                                                      Bibliography

  (1973). Modernization and Bureaucratic Authoritarianism, Berkeley: Institute of
     International Studies, University of California Press.
Ordóñez, Antonio (1991). “La Salud: Una Prioridad en el Gobierno de Transformación
     Nacional,” in 25 Años del Gobierno de Transformación Nacional. Bogota: Nueva
     Frontera, 47–56.
  (1968). Bienestar Social en Colombia: Ponencia Presentada por Colombia a la
     Conferencia Internacional de Ministros de los Servicios de Bienestar Social, Nueva
     York 1968, Bogotá: Ministerio de Salud.
Ortiz de Zevallos, Gabriel, Hugo Eyzaguirre, Rosa María Palacios, and Pierina
     Polarollo (1999). La Economía Política de las Reformas Institucionales en el Perú:
     Los Casos de Educación, Salud, y Pensiones. Working paper R-3948. Washington:
     Inter-American Development Bank.
Palacios, Marco (2001). “Saber Es Poder: El Caso de los Economistas Colombianos,” in
     De Populistas, Mandarines, y Violencias, Bogotá: Editorial Planeta Colombiana.
Panizza, Francisco (2013). “Everybody Out: We Are Fantastic,” in Francisco Panizza
     and George Philip (Eds.), The Politics of Financial Crises in Argentina and Uruguay
     2001–2003, London: Routledge, 27–46.
Pastor, Manuel, and Carol Wise (1992). “From Orthodoxy to Heterodoxy and Back,”
     Latin American Research Review, 27:2, 83–117.
Payne, James L. (1968). Patterns of Conflict in Colombia, New Haven: Yale University
     Press.
Petrera, Margarita, and Janice Seinfeld (2007). Repensando la Salud en el Perú,
     Lima: CIUP.
Pierson, Paul (2000). “Increasing Returns, Path Dependence, and the Study of Politics,”
     American Political Science Review, 94:2, 251–267.
  (1994). Dismantling the Welfare State: Reagan, Thatcher, and the Politics of
     Retrenchment, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Polarollo, Pierina (2000). “La Reforma del Sector Salud,” in Abusada et al. (Eds.),
     La Reforma Incompleta, Lima: Centro de Investigación de la Universidad del
     Pacífico.
Putnam, Robert D. (1977). “Elite Transformation in Advanced Societies: An Empirical
     Assessment of the Theory of Technocracy,” Comparative Political Studies, 10:3
     (October), 383–412.
Ramírez, Patricia (2004). “A Sweeping Health Reform: the Quest for Unification,
     Coverage, and Efficiency,” in Robert R. Kaufman and Joan M. Nelson (Eds.),
     Crucial Needs, Weak Incentives: Social Sector Reform, Democratization, and
     Globalization in Latin America. Baltimore: Woodrow Wilson Center and Johns
     Hopkins University Press, 2004.
Redondo, Hernán, and Fernando Guzmán (1999). La Reforma de la Salud y la Seguridad
     Social en Colombia: El Desastre de un Modelo Económico. Medellín: Biblioteca
     Jurídica Dike.
Redrado, Martín (2010). Sin Reservas: Un Límite al Poder Absoluto, Buenos Aires,
     Planeta.
Reina, Mauricio, and Sara Zuluaga (2006). “Safeguards and Antidumping Duties
     in Colombia,” in: J. Michael Finger and Julio J. Nogués (Eds.), Safeguards and
     Antidumping in Latin American Trade Liberalization: Fighting Fire with Fire,
     Washington, DC: World Bank and Palgrave McMillan.
Bibliography                                                                      181

Rentería, Carolina (2008). “Cincuenta Años del DNP: Historia de una Construcción
     Colegiada,” Planeación y Desarrollo, XXXIX:2, 84–99.
Reuben, William, and Leah Belsky (2006). “Voice in the Accountability of Social
     Policy,” in Daniel Cotlear (Ed.), New Social Contract for Peru, Washington:
     World Bank.
Reyna, Carlos, and Antonio Zapata (1991). Crónica sobre el Cólera en el Perú. Lima:
     Desco.
Riesman, David (1950) The Lonely Crows, New Haven and London: Yale
     University Press
Rios Figueroa, Julio (2007). “Fragmentation of Power and the Emergence of an
     Effective Judiciary in Mexico, 1994–2002,” Latin American Politics and Society,
     49:1, 31–57.
Rustow, Dankwart (1970). “Transitions to Democracy: Toward a Dynamic Model,”
     Comparative Politics, 2:3, 337–363.
Sandilands, Roger (1990). The Life and Political Economy of Lauchlin Currie: New
     Dealer, Presidential Adviser, and Development Economist, Durham: Duke
     University Press.
Santiso, Javier, and Laurence Whitehead (2006). “Ulysses, the Sirens, and the Art of
     Navigation: Political and Technical Rationality in Latin America,” Working Paper
     N. 256. OECD Development Center.
Sarfatti Larson, Magali (1984). “The Production of Expertise and the Constitution
     of Expert Power,” in Thomas Haskell (Ed.), The Authority of Experts: Studies in
     History and Theory, Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Schaar, John (1984). “Legitimacy in the Modern State,” in William Connolly (Ed.),
     Legitimacy and the State, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Schamis, Héctor (1999). “Distributional Coalitions and the Politics of Economic Reform
     in Latin America,” World Politics, 51:2, 236–268.
Schmidt, Steffen W. (1974). “Bureaucrats as Modernizing Brokers? Clientelism in
     Colombia,” Comparative Politics, 6:3, 425–450.
Schneider, Ben Ross (2004). Business Politics and the State in Twentieth Century Latin
     America, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
   (1998). “The Material Basis of Technocracy: Investor Confidence and Neoliberalism
     in Latin America,” in Miguel A. Centeno and Patricio Silva (Eds.), The Politics of
     Expertise in Latin America, New York: Macmillan Press.
   (1993). “The Career Connection: A Comparative Analysis of Bureaucratic Preferences
     and Insulation,” Comparative Politics, 25 (April), 331–350.
Shugart, Matthew and John Carey (1992). Presidents and Assemblies, Cambridge:
     Cambridge University Press.
Silva, Eduardo (1993). “Capitalist Coalitions, the State, and Neoliberal Economic
     Restructuring: Chile, 1973–1978,” World Politics, 45:4, 526–559.
Silva, Patricio (2008). In the Name of Reason: Technocrats and Politics in Chile,
     University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.
   (1991). “Technocrats and Politics in Chile: From the Chicago Boys to the Cieplan
     Monks,” Journal of Latin American Studies, 23:2, 385–410.
Skocpol, Theda (1985). “Bringing the State Back In: Strategies of Analysis in Current
     Research,” in Peter Evans, Dietrich Rueschemeyer, and Theda Skocpol (Eds.),
     Bringing the State Back In, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
182                                                                        Bibliography

Stallings, Barbara (1992).“International Influence on Economic Policy: Debt, Stabilization,
     and Structural Reform,” in Stephan Haggard and Robert R. Kaufman (Eds.), The
     Politics of Adjustment in the Third World, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Stepan, Alfred (1978). State and Society: Peru in Comparative Perspective, Princeton:
     Princeton University Press.
Stokes, Susan (2001). Mandates and Democracy: Neoliberalism by Surprise in Latin
     America, Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.
Suleiman, Ezra (1974). Politics, Power, and Bureaucracy in France, Princeton: Princeton
     University Press.
Tanaka, Martín (2005). Democracia sin Partidos: Perú 2000–2005, Lima: IEP.
Tanaka, Martín, Rodrigo Barrenechea, and Jorge Morel (2011). “La Relación entre
     Investigación y Políticas Públicas en América Latina: Un Análisis Exploratorio,”
     in Norma Correa and Enrique Mendizabal (Eds.), Vínculos entre Conocimiento y
     Política: El Rol de la Investigación en el Debate Público en América Latina. Lima:
     CIES/Universidad del Pacífico, 2011, 35–82.
Taylor, Matthew (2009). “Institutional Development through Policy Making: A Case
     Study of the Brazilian Central Bank,” World Politics, 61:3, 487–515.
Teichman, Judith (2004). “Merging the Modern and the Traditional: Market Reform in
     Chile and Argentina,” Comparative Politics, 37:1, 23–40.
  (2002). “Private Sector Power and Market Reform: Exploring the Domestic Origins
     of Argentina’s Meltdown and México’s Policy Failures,” Third World Quarterly,
     22:3, 491–512.
  (1997). “Mexico and Argentina: Economic Reform and Technocratic Decision
     Making,” Studies in Comparative International Development, 32:1, 31–55.
Tejada de Rivero, David (1985). “Conference: Atención Primaria de la Salud y
     Ampliación de la Cobertura,” in Laura Morales (Ed.), Políticas de Salud para el
     Perú: Medidas de Urgencia, Lima: Friedirich Ebert.
Thorp, Rosemary (1991). Economic Management and Economic Development in Peru
     and Colombia, Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Thorp, Rosemary, and Francisco Durand (1997). “A Historical View of Business-State
     Relations: Colombia, Peru, and Venezuela Compared,” in Ben Ross Schneider and
     Sylvia Mansfield (Eds.), Business and the State in Developing Countries, Ithaca and
     London: Cornell University Press.
Tocqueville, Alexis de (2000). Democracy in America, Translated and Edited by Harvey
     Mansfield and Delba Winthrop, Chicago and London: University of Chicago
     Press.
Trimberger, Ellen Kay (1978). Revolution from Above: Military Bureaucrats and
     Development in Japan, Turkey, Egypt, and Peru, New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction
     Books.
Ugarte, Mayén (2000) “La Reforma del Estado: Alcances y Perspectivas in Abusada
     et al. (Eds.), La Reforma Incompleta: Rescatando los Noventa, Lima: Centro de
     Investigación de la Universidad del Pacífico, 13–61.
Ugarte, Oscar, and Jose Antonio Monje (1999). “Equidad y Reformas en el Sector
     Salud,” in Felipe Portocarrero (Ed.), Pobreza y Políticas Sociales en el Perú: Nuevos
     Aportes. Lima: Red para el Desarrollo de las Ciencias Sociales.
Universidad del Pacífico (1979). Perú 1980, Planes de Gobierno, Lima: Universidad del
     Pacífico.
Uribe, Juan Pablo (2004). “The Influence of Foreign Models on Health Reform in
     Colombia,” in Kurt Weyland (Ed.), Learning from Foreign Models in Latin
Bibliography                                                                      183

    American Policy Reform, Washington and Baltimore: Woodrow Wilson Center
    Press and Johns Hopkins University Press.
Urrutia, Miguel (2008). “La Función de la Planeación en Colombia,” Planeación y
    Desarrollo, XXXIX:2, (July–December), 66–75.
  (1991). “On the Absence of Economic Populism in Colombia,” in Rudiger Dornbusch
    and Sebastian Edwards (Eds.), The Macroeconomics of Populism in Latin America,
    Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.
  (1983). Gremios, Política Económica, y Democracia, Bogotá: Fondo Cultural
    Cafetero.
USAID (1974). Misión USAID Colombia. Un Análisis del Sector Colombiano de Salud
    Pública, Bogotá: USAID.
Van Dijck, Pitou (1998). “The World Bank and the Transformation of Latin American
    Society,” in Miguel A. Centeno and Patricio Silva (Eds.), The Politics of Expertise
    in Latin America. New York: Macmillan Press.
Vergara, Alberto (2012). “Alternancia sin Alternativa: ¿Un Año de Humala o Veinte
    Años de un Sistema?” Revista Argumentos, 6:3 (July). <http://revistargumentos.
    org.pe/alternancia_sin_alternativa.html>
Vidal, Carlos (1994a). “7 Meses y 7 Días Como Ministro de Salud del Perú,” in Carlos
    Vidal, Apuntes de una Vida Dedicada a la Gente, Tomo II, Lima: Sinco Editores,
    307–341.
  (1994b). “Una Aproximación Diferente al Ministerio de Salud,” in Carlos Vidal,
    Apuntes de una Vida Dedicada a la Gente, Tomo II, Lima: Sinco Editores,
    342–362.
Vivas, Reyna, Eugenio Tarazona, Carlos Caballero, and Nancy Marrero (1988).
    El Sistema Nacional de Salud: Administración, Presupuestación, Gasto, y
    Financiamiento, Bogotá: Fedesarrolllo.
Waterman, Richard W., and Kenneth Meier (1998). “Principal-Agent Models:
    An Expansion?” Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 8:2,
    173–202.
Webb, Richard (1994). “Peru,” in John Williamson (Ed.), The Political Economy of
    Policy Reform, Washington: Institute for International Economics.
Webb, Richard, and Sofía Valencia (2006). “Human Resources in Public Health and
    Education,” in Daniel Cotlear (Ed.), New Social Contract for Peru, Washington:
    World Bank.
Weber, Max (1946). “Bureaucracy,” in Max Weber, Essays in Sociology, Hans
    Heinrich Gerth (Ed.) and C. Wright Mills, (Tran.), New York, Oxford University
    Press.
Weyland, Kurt (2006). Bounded Rationality and Policy Diffusion: Social Sector Reform
    in Latin America, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
  (2005). “Theories of Policy Diffusion: Lessons from Latin American Pension Reform,”
    World Politics 57:2, 265–295.
  (2002a). The Politics of Market Reform in Fragile Democracies: Argentina, Brazil,
    Peru, and Venezuela, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
  (2002b). “Limitations of Rational Choice Institutionalism for the Study of Latin
    American Politics,” Studies in Comparative International Development, 37:1,
    57–85.
  (1998). “The Political Fate of Market Reform in Latin America, Africa, and Eastern
    Europe,” International Studies Quarterly, 42:4, 645–673.
  (1996). Democracy without Equity, Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
184                                                                    Bibliography

Wilde, Alexander (1978). “Conversations among Gentlemen: Oligarchical Democracy in
     Colombia,” in Juan J. Linz and Alfred Stepan (Eds.) The Breakdown of Democratic
     Regimes: Latin America, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Williams, Mark Eric (2006). “Escaping the Zero-Sum Scenario: Democracy versus
     Technocracy in Latin America,” Political Science Quarterly, 121:1, 119–139.
Wise, Carol (2003). Reinventing the State: Economic Strategy and Institutional Change
     in Peru, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
  (1986). “Economía Política del Perú: Rechazo a la Receta Ortodoxa,” Documento de
     Trabajo N. 16. Lima: Instituto de Estudios Peruanos.
World Bank (2004). World Development Report 2004: Voice of Users, or the Poor,
     Washington, DC: World Bank.
  (2000). Bolivia: From Patronage to a Professional State, Report No. 20115-BO,
     Washington, DC: World Bank.
  (1993). World Development Report 1993: Investing in Health. Washington, DC:
     World Bank, New York: Oxford University Press.
  (1987). Financing Health Services in Developing Countries: An Agenda for Reform,
     Washington, DC: World Bank.
Yepes, Francisco, Manuel Ramírez, Luz Helena Sánchez, Marta Lucía Ramírez, and
     Iván Jaramillo (2010). Luces y Sombras de la Reforma de Salud en Colombia: Ley
     100 de 1993. Bogotá: Universidad del Rosario/Assalud/Mayol Ediciones.
Yglesias, Arturo (1999). “Marco de Análisis para la Evaluación y el Diseño e
     Implementación de las Reformas de Atención en Salud,” in Felipe Portocarrero
     (Ed.), Pobreza y Políticas Sociales en el Perú: Nuevos Aportes, Lima: Red para el
     Desarrollo de las Ciencias Sociales.
Interviews




Colombia
Arenas, Roberto (2006). Author interview. Director of the NPD (1970–1974). Bogotá:
     10th. May.
Arias, Andrés (2009). Author interview. Minister of Agriculture (2006–2010) and Vice
     Minister of Finance (2003–2004). Candidate, conservative party presidential pri-
     maries (2010). Bogotá: 28th July.
Ávila, Ricardo (2008). Author interview. Economic adviser to President César Gaviria
     (1990–1994). Editor of Portafolio. Bogotá: 7th May.
Barco, Víctor Renán (2006). Author interview. Senator. Member of the Budget
     Commission. Bogotá: 17th May.
Botero, Rodrigo (2009). Author telephone interview. Minister of Finance (1974–1976).
     Founder of Fedesarrollo. Boston: 27th July.
Caballero Argáez, Carlos (2007). Author interview. Member, Monetary Board (2001–
     2003). Dean, Public Policy Department, Los Andes University. Bogotá: 8th
     October.
Cano, Carlos Gustavo (2008). Author interview. Director, Central Bank. Bogotá: 29th
     April.
Cadena, María Isabel (2009). Author interview. General Secretary, Ministry of Finance.
     Bogotá: 23rd July.
Cárdenas, Jorge Hernán (2008). Author interview. Expert in administrative reform.
     Bogotá: 25th January.
Cárdenas, Mauricio (2008). Author interview. NPD Director (1999–2000). Director,
     Fedesarrollo. Bogotá: 21st January.
Castaño, Ramón (2008). Author interview. Health expert. Member and Director of
     PARS. Bogotá: 8th February.
Cepeda, Manuel (2006). Author interview. Constitutional Justice. President,
     Constitutional Court (2001–2009) Bogotá: 18th May.
Chávez, Juliana (2008). Author interview. Adviser, office of the Vice President. Assistant
     in the DNP (2001–2005). Bogotá: 8th February.


                                                                                     185
186                                                                        Interviews

Dávila, Andrés (2008). Author interview. Political Scientist and Adviser, office of the
     Vice President. Chief of the Justice and Security area, DNP, 2001–2007, Bogotá:
     8th February.
Echeverry, Juan Carlos (2008). Author interview. NPD Director (2000–2002). Minister
     of Finance (2010–). Bogotá: 24th January.
Galán Sarmiento, Augusto (2009). Author interview. Minister of Health (2005–2006).
     Bogotá: 29th July.
Gaviria, Alejandro (2008). Author interview. Deputy Director of NPD (2002–2004).
     Dean, Economics Department, Universidad de Los Andes. Bogota: 4th March.
Gaviria, César (2013). Author telephone interview. Colombian President (1990–1994).
     Bogotá: 7th October.
Giedion, Úrsula (2008). Author interview. Health expert. Consultant to the Ministry of
     Health and PARS. Bogotá: 11th February.
Hernández, Gregorio (2008). Author interview. General Manager, Banco de la República.
     Bogotá: 7th May.
Hommes, Rudolph (2008). Author interview. Minister of Finance (1990–1994). Bogotá:
     28th May.
Janna, Michel (2013). Director of Public Credit, Ministry of Finance (April 2013–).
     Bogotá: 24th September.
Junguito, Roberto (2008). Author interview. Minister of Finance (1984–1986; 2002–
     2003). Monetary Bank Board (1991–1999). Bogotá: 7th February.
Kalmanovitz, Salomón (2008). Author interview. Member, Monetary Board of Banco
     de la República (1993–2005). Bogotá: 24th April.
La Serna, Juan Mario (2008). Author interview. Member, Monetary Board of Banco de
     la República, (2005–2009). Bogotá: 29th April.
Llorente, Rodrigo (2006). Author interview. Minister of Finance (1973–1974). Bogotá:
     15th May.
Mejía, Luis Bernardo (2006). Author interview. NPD official. (1996–2001). Bogotá:
     14th May 2006.
Montenegro, Santiago (2008). Author interview. NPD Director (2002–2006). Bogotá:
     28th February.
Morales Benites, Olympo (2008). Author interview. Politician. Member, liberal party
     and Alas Equipo Colombia. Bogotá: 2nd May.
Morales Benites, Otto (2006). Author interview. Liberal party leader. Minister of
     Agriculture, (1960–1962, Minister of Labor (1958–1960). Bogotá: 15th May.
Ordóñez, Antonio (2006). Author interview. Minister of Health (1966–1970). Health
     expert. Bogotá: 17th May.
Paredes, Nelcy (2008). Author interview. Health expert. Member, “Team Change.”
     Adviser, ACEMI. Bogotá: 20th February.
Perry, Guillermo (2008). Author interview. Minister of Finance (1994–1996). Bogotá:
     26th February.
Pinto, Diana (2009). Author interview. Health expert. Member, PARS. Adviser, Ministry
     of Social Protection. Researcher, Fedesarrollo. Bogotá: 23rd July.
Ramírez, Jaime (2009). Author interview. Health expert. Senior technical Advisor of
     PARS. (1999–2001). Bogotá: 28th July.
Reina, Mauricio (2008). Author interview. Vice Minister of Commerce (1994–1995).
     Researcher, Fedesarrollo. Bogotá: 27th February.
Interviews                                                                         187

Reyes Forero, Carlos (2012). Author phone interview. Colombian health expert. Adviser
     to Minister Mauricio Santa María. Bogotá: 17th January.
Samper, Ernesto (2008). President of Colombia (1994–1998), Bogota 14th February.
Santa María, Mauricio (2008). Author interview. Deputy Director, NPD (2005–2007).
     Minister of Social Protection (2010–2012). Bogotá: 28th February.
Steiner, Roberto (2009). Author interview. Director of Fedesarrollo (2009–). Bogotá:
     21stÂ€July.
Tono, Teresa (2008). Author interview. Health expert. Member and Director of PARS
     (1996–2008). Adviser, Ministry of Health. Bogotá: 24th April.
Uribe, Juan Pablo (2008). Author interview. Health expert. Adviser, Ministry of Health.
     Vice Minister of Health (2002). Bogotá: 29th January.
Urrutia, Miguel (2008). Author interview. Director, NPD (1974–1977). Adviser to the
     Monetary Board (1966–1970). Secretary General, Banco de la República (1993–
     2005). Bogotá: 25th February.
Vidal Perdomo, Jaime (2006). Author interview. Secretary of the Presidency (1958–
     1962). Bogotá: 13thÂ€May.
Zapata, Juan (2011). Author phone interview. Colombian health expert. Member,
     Fedesarrollo. Bogotá: 16th November.


Peru
Abugattás, Javier (2007) Author interview. Vice Minister of Economy (1988). Adviser,
     MEF (various periods over the last twenty years). Lima: 10th August.
Abusada, Roberto (2010) Author interview. Viceminister of Commerce in MEF (1980–
     1982) and advisor in MEF during some periods during the nineties. Lima 29th March.
Alva Orlandini, Javier (2007) Author interview. Vice President (1980–1985). Senator
     (1980–1990). Leader and member of Acción Popular. Lima: 20thÂ€June.
Álvarez, Rosalía (2007). Author interview. Secretary General, MEF (2006–2008).
     Official in MEF since 1982. Lima: 4th December.
Álvarez Rodrich, Augusto (2007) Author interview. Member, Board of OSIPTEL (1993–
     1998). Lima: 15thÂ€June.
Aráoz, Mercedes (2013). Author telephone interview. Minister of Economics (December
     2009–September 2010)Â€Lima: 29th November.
Arce, Melitón (2007). Author interview. Vice Minister of Health (1985–1988; 2007).
     Adviser, MINSA (2006–2007). Lima: 18thÂ€June.
Arias Stella, Javier (2007). Author interview. Minister of Health (1964–1966), (1967–
     1968). Minister of Foreign Affairs (1980–1983). Lima: 17thÂ€July.
Arrieta, Alejandro (2007) Author interview. Adviser, MEF (various periods since 1980).
     Lima: 3rdÂ€June.
Arrisueño, Gabriel (2007) Author interview. Researcher, Institute for Liberty and
     Democracy (ILD). Lima: 15th August.
Arrunátegui, Jorge (2013) Author interview. Adviser, MEF (2003–2006). Vice Minister
     of Social Benefits, Ministry of Development and Social Inclusion (2011–2013).
     Lima: 30th December.
Ballén, Mariana (2007). Author interview. Adviser, MEF. Lima: 5th December.
Barletti, Bruno (2007). Author interview. Adviser, MEF. Official in charge of implement-
     ing the Sistema Integrado de Administración Financiera (SIAF). Lima: 20thÂ€July.
188                                                                        Interviews

Blume, Cecilia (2007). Author interview. Chief Adviser, MEF (2005–2006). Lima:
    7th.July.
Boza, Beatriz (2007). Author interview. President of INDECOPI (1994–2000). Adviser,
    MEF (2000–2001). Lima: 30th.July.
Burneo, Kurt (2007). Author interview. Vice Minister of Finance (2001–2004), MEF.
    Member, Board of the Central Bank (2001–2006). Lima: 15th June.
Cáceres, Rosario (2007). Author interview. Chief, Parliamentary Coordination Office,
    MEF. Lima: 2nd August.
Calderón, José (2007). Author interview. Vice Minister of Health (2007). Doctor in
    MINSA (since the 1980s). Lima: 21st June.
Campos, Fernando (2007). Author interview. Legal Adviser, MINSA. Negotiator with
    unions. Lima: 21st June.
Carranza, Luis (2010). Author interview. Minister of Economics (2006–2008; 2009).
    Lima: 11th February.
Carrillo, Carlos (2007). Author interview. Director (1990–1992), (1994–1999), Instituto
    Nacional de Salud. Lima: 16th October.
Casas, Carlos (2013). Author interview. Vice Minister of Economics (2010). Chief of
    Advisers (2006–2008), and Adviser (1999), MEF. Lima: 21st November.
Chávez, Benjamín (2008). Author interview. Adviser, Ministry of Commerce. Lima:
    16th November.
Cortez, Juan Carlos (2007). Author interview. Deputy Director, Ciudadanos al Día.
    Lima: 2nd July.
Cubas, Víctor (2007). Author interview. Vice Minister of Health (1990–1991). Dean,
    Public Health Department, Universidad Cayetano Heredia. Lima: 3rd July.
Del Castillo, Jorge (2007). Author interview. President, Council of Ministers (2006–
    2008). Lima: 28th June.
Díaz, Álvaro (2007). Author interview. Adviser and Negotiator (Free Trade Agreements),
    Ministry of Commerce. Lima: 16th November.
Du Bois, Fritz (2007). Author interview. Chief of Cabinet, MEF (1991–1997). Lima:
    18th June.
Escaffi, José (2007). Author interview. General Manager of OSIPTEL (1993–1997).
    Lima: 15th July.
Espinoza, Rubén (2007). Author interview. Consultant and Researcher, Instituto
    Nacional de Salud. Adviser, MINSA (1990s). Lima: 16th August.
Farah, Eduardo (2007). Author interview. President, National Society of Industry
    (2007). Lima: 27th June.
Ferrero, Carlos (2007). Author interview. President, Council of Ministers (2003–2005).
    Lima: 1st June.
Ferraro, Carlos (2007). Author interview. Vice Minister of Commerce (2002–2009).
    Lima: 30th October.
Francke, Pedro (2007). Author interview. Director, FONCODES (2001–2003). Expert
    in health policies. Lima: 19th June.
Fuentes Rivera, José (2007). Author interview. MINSA Official in Directive Positions
    since the eighties. Lima: 4th July.
Gálvez, Nelly (2007). Author interview. Official, DIGEMID (Medical drugs regulation
    office in MINSA). Lima: 17th August.
Gana Perú (2011). La Gran Transformación: Plan de Gobierno 2011–2016, Lima:
    Gana Perú.
Interviews                                                                         189

García, Uriel (2007). Author interview. Minister of Health (1980–1982). Lima:
    10th July.
Gastañeta, Rafael (2007). Author interview. Adviser, Minister of Commerce. Lima: 16th
    November.
Gozzer, Ernesto (2007). Author interview. Consultant, MINSA (1991–1993). Member,
    Office of International Cooperation (1994–1999). Lima: 21st August.
Guerra García, Roger (2007). Author interview. Congressman 1995–2000. Dean,
    Universidad Cayetano Heredia (1989–1994). Lima: 9th July.
Guerrero, Luis (2007). Author interview. Official, SIAF, MEF. Lima: 11th December.
Hume, María Jesús. (2007). Author interview. Vice Minister of Commerce (1980–1982),
    MEF. Lima: 13th December.
Iwsaki, Maria Lila (2007). Author interview. Advisor and Secretary General (1999) in
    MEF. Lima, 27 September.
Johnson, Jaime (2007). Author interview. Public Health Expert. Adviser, MINSA and
    other social policy agencies. Lima 26th June.
Kapsoli, Javier (2007). Author interview. Director, Social and Economic Affairs, MEF
    (2007). Lima: 11th June.
Kuczynski, Pedro Pablo (2007). Author interview. Minister of Economics (2001–
    2002; 2004–2005). President, Council of Ministers (2005–2006). Lima: 17th
    August.
León García, Luis (2007). Author interview. Director, General Health Office, MINSA
    (2007). Lima: 19th October.
Lescano, Yonhy (2007). Author interview. Congressman for Puno. Lima: 5th.
    December.
Llanos, Alejandro (2007). Author interview. Public health expert. Director, Epidemiology
    Office, National Health Institute (1985–1992). Adviser in the Andean Pact. Lima:
    3rd July.
Lombardi, Guido (2008). Author interview. Congressman, Unidad Nacional (2006–
    2011). President, Economy Committee, Peruvian Congress. Lima: 17th August.
Luján, Manuel (2007). Author interview. Doctor in MINSA (1982–present). Vice
    Ministerial Adviser (2004–2006). Lima: 26th July.
Marchena, Pedro (2007). Author interview. Expert in MINSA (1990s). Lima: 24th
    October.
Martinez, Juan José (2007). Author interview. Legal Adviser, MEF. Lima: 21st
    November.
Mazetti, Pilar (2007). Author interview. Minister of Health (2004–2006). Lima: 29th
    November.
Meloni, Augusto (2007). Author interview. Public health expert. Director, Office of
    Cooperation (1993–1999). Lima: June 1st and 4th August.
Mendoza, Pedro (2007). Author interview. Member, International Cooperation Office,
    MINSA (1995–2000). Lima: 22nd August.
Mendoza, Waldo (2007). Author interview. Vice Minister of Finance (2004–2005).
    Lima: 6th June.
Monteagudo, Manuel (2008). Author interview. Legal Adviser, Central Bank. Lima:
    11th August.
Montoya, Andrés (2007). Author interview. Adviser, MEF (2003–2004). Lima: 6th July.
Montoya, Víctor Hugo (2007). Author interview. Legal Expert, Constitutional Tribunal.
    Lima: 6th December.
190                                                                        Interviews

Morales, José Miguel (2007). Author interview. President, CONFIEP (2005–2006).
     Lima: 25th June.
Mori, Antonio (2007). Author interview. MEF official. Member, SIAF, MEF. Lima: 11th
     December.
Morón, Eduardo (2007 and 2013). Author interview. Vice Minister of Economics (2008–
     2009), Adviser, MEF and MINCETUR. Researcher, Center of Research, Universidad
     del Pacífico (CIUP). Lima: 14th November 2007; 19th November 2013.
Nakasone, Eduardo (2007). Author interview. Adviser, MEF (2003–2004). Lima:
     17th July.
Negrón, Carmen (2007). Author interview. MEF official. Lima: 30th May.
Palacios, Rosa María (2007). Author interview. Adviser, PCM. Journalist. Lima:
     10th July.
Pasco Font, Alberto (2007). Author interview. Economist. Executive Director, COPRI.
     Lima: 3rd December.
Pastor, Ada (2007). Author interview. Deputy Director, PRAES. Public Officer, Instituto
     Peruano de Seguridad Social (IPSS) now ESSALUD. Lima: 19th October.
Peña, Manuel (2007). Author interview. Director, Pan American Health Organization
     (PAHO), Peru. Lima: 6th August.
Pérez, Martín (2008). Author interview. Minister of Commerce (2008–2010). Lima:
     19th August.
Pinillos, Luis (2007). Author interview. Minister of Health (1988–1989). Lima:
     21st June.
Polarollo, Pierina (2007). Author interview. Adviser, MEF. Health reform expert. Lima:
     14th June.
Portocarrero, Augusto (2010). Author interview. Health expert. Ministry Adviser and
     Health Official, MINSA. Lima: 5th August.
Pretell, Eduardo (2007). Author interview. Minister of Health (2000–2007). Lima: 27th
     November.
Prialé, Miguel (2007). Author interview. Director, SNIP. Lima: 6th June.
Quijandría, Jaime (2009). Author interview. Minister of Economics (2003–2004). Lima:
     25th June.
Ramírez, Gladys (2007). Author interview. Deputy Director, Epidemiology Office,
     Ministry of Health. Lima: 28th May.
Rettberg, Angelika (2009). Author interview. Political scientist. Expert on business
     groups in Colombia. Bogotá: 24th July 2009.
Rivera, Iván (2011). Minister of Industry (1983–1984). Advisor in MEF (1993–1996).
     Skype Interview. Washington 4th January.
Salazar, Ricardo (2007). Author interview. President, CONSUCODE (2001–2003).
     Lima: 13th June.
Sánchez Moreno, Francisco (2007). Author interview. Vice Minister of Health (1978–
     1979). Director, Academia Peruana de la Salud. Lima: 13th August.
Seinfield, Janice (2007). Author interview. Public health expert. Researcher, Centro de
     Investigación de la Universidad del Pacífico. Lima: 14th November.
Solari, Luis (2007). Author interview. Health Minister (2001–2002). First Minister
     (2002–2003). Congressman, Peru Posible (2001–2006). Lima: 11th June.
Sotelo, Eduardo (2007). Author interview. Legal adviser, MEF and SUNAT. Lima: 21st
     August.
Interviews                                                                     191

Távara, José (2007). Author interview. Director, OSIPTEL (2004–2007). Vice Minister
     of Communications (2004–2007). Lima: 6th December.
Tejada de Rivero, David (2007). Author interview. Minister of Health (1985–1987;
     1989). Lima: 10th July.
Teullet, Patricia (2007). Author interview. Vice Minister of Economics (2001–2002).
     Lima: 12th June.
Ugarte, José Miguel (2008). Author interview. Director, National Direction of Public
     Indebtment, MEF. Lima: 7th August.
Ugarte, Mayén (2006). Author interview. Adviser, MEF (1994–1998). Lima: 10th June.
Ugarte, Óscar (2007). Author interview. Minister of Health (2009–2011) and Vice
     Minister of Health (2001–2002). Lima: 10th July.
Valencia, Sofía (2007). Author interview. Economist. World Bank Consultant. Lima:
     5th July.
Vásquez, María Inés (2007). Author interview. Adviser, MEF (2003–2006). Lima:
     25th May.
Vera, José Carlos (2007). Author interview. Adviser, MEF and MINSA (1993–1994).
     Lima: 17th October.
Vidal, Álvaro (2007). Author interview. Minister of Health (2003–2004). Lima: 14th
     August.
Vílchez, Nidia (2007). Author interview. Congresswoman for Junín. Member, Budget
     Commission, Congress. Lima: 6th December.
Villarán, Fernando (2007). Author interview. Minister of Labor (2001–2003). Lima:
     26th July.
Von Hesse, Milton (2007). Author interview. Adviser, MEF. Director of SNIP (2002–
     2006). Lima: 14th June.
Webb, Richard (2007). Author interview. President, Central Bank (1983–1985; 2001–
     2003). Lima: 6th December.
Zamalloa, Edgar (2007). Author interview. Adviser, MEF (1998–2004). Director of
     Economic Analysis, MEF (2005–2006). Lima: 17th July.
Zavala, Fernando (2007). Author interview. Minister of Economics (2005–2006). Lima:
     15th October.
Zegarra, Gonzalo (2007). Author interview. Editor, Semana Económica. Lima:
     31st May.
Index




An n following a page number indicates a note; a t following a page number indicates a table.


Abusada, Roberto, 92, 98, 99                      Arenas, Roberto, 84
Acción Popular (AP; Peru), 91–92, 93, 94, 95      Argáez, Carlos Caballero, 69, 80n10
Administradoras de Régimen Subsidiado, 122        Argentina
agenda setters, technocrats as, 5, 22, 35           fall of economic experts in, 12, 156,
agents of business perspective, 28–33                       157–158, 159, 160
  limitations, 30–33                                financial crisis in, 157, 159
     autonomy in social policy sectors, 33          importance of technocrats in, 154
     relationships of subordination, 30–33          market reform in, 157
  private sector work experience before             reduction of technical autonomy in, 62
          appointment, 30                         Asociación Bancaria y de Entidades
  strong structural perspective, 29                         Financieras de Colombia
  weak structural perspective, 29–30                        (ASOBANCARIA), 84–85
agents of international financial institutions    Asociación Colombiana de Hospitales y
          (IFIs) perspective, 25–28                         Clínicas (ACHC; Association of
  initial appointments, 28                                  Health Providers), 129
  limitations, 26–28                              Asociación Nacional de Empresarios de
     persistence of autonomy over time, 27–28               Colombia (ANDI), 30, 84–85
     relationships of subordination, 26–27        Asociación Nacional de Instituciones Financieras
  use of leverage, 26                                       (ANIF; Association of Financial
  use of linkages, 25–26                                    Institutions; Colombia), 84–85
Aguinaga, Alejandro, 142                          authoritarian regimes
Ahumada, Consuelo, 74                               bureaucratic authoritarianism, 3
Alfonsin, Raúl, 157–158                             historical association of technocrats with,
Alliance for Progress, 68                                   3, 165
Alva Orlandini, Javier, 95, 95n1, 96, 96n3          semi-authoritarian regimes, 3
ANAPO (Colombia), 117                               in Venezuela, 160
ANC (National Association of Coffee               autonomy of technocrats, overview of, 4–5
          Growers; Colombia), 30                    expertise as main source of, 5, 112
ANDI (Asociación Nacional de Empresarios            factors in variation in strength of, 5–9, 6t1.1
          de Colombia), 30, 84–85                   limitations to, 9
AP (Acción Popular; Peru), 91–92, 93, 94, 95        and politics of policy factors, 6–8, 10t1.2
APOYO (Colombia), 165                                  constellation of stakeholders, 7–8, 10t1.2
APRA (Peru), 96–97, 102–103, 107, 136                  cost of bad policy performance, 6–7,
Arce, Moisés, 29–30                                         10t1.2


                                                                                              193
194                                                                                       Index

autonomy of technocrats, overview of (cont.)            and technical autonomy in
  strength in policy sector, 5                               Colombia, 74
  and technical aspects of policy, 8, 10t1.2            technocrat-business relationship, 31–32
     expert consensus, 8, 10t1.2                     defining, 25n3
     policy complexity, 8, 10t1.2.                   instrumentalist theory on, 30–33
          See also technocratic autonomy             in Peru
          theory                                        appointment of pro-business technocrats,
                                                             104–105
Baca Campodónico, Jorge, 100                            career path of technocrats closely linked
Bachelet, Michele, 154–155                                   to, 103–104
Banco de la República (Central Bank;                    disagreements with neo-liberal
           Colombia)                                         technocrats, 104
  education requirements for technocrats, 78            increased power of business sector in
  Monetary Board of, 32, 68, 76                              Peru, 62
  as research center, 79                                and insulation economic policy
  scholarship programs for technocrats, 78                   making, 104
  separate interest rate for coffee industry, 74        opposition to reforms in 1980s, 95
  technical excellence of, 65                           privatization of state enterprises, 93,
banking sector, 155                                          98, 99
Banzer, Hugo, 158                                       technocrat-business relationship, 32–33
Barco, Victor Renán, 72                              technocratic autonomy theory on, 50
Barco, Virgilio, 65, 73, 75                          and technocratic continuity, 61.
Barnett, Michael N., 37                                      See also stakeholders
Bates, Robert, 28
Belaúnde, Fernando, 32, 90–93                      Cajas de Compensación Familiar (special
Bermúdez, Francisco Morales, 91                              insurance systems; Colombia), 117
Bersh, David, 116                                  Camet, Jorge, 99, 100
Betancourt, Belisario, 73                          Carbone, Fernando, 143
Betancur, Belisario, 65                            Cárdenas, Mauricio, 80n10
Biglaiser, Glen, 40                                Cardoso, Fernando Henrique, 155
Bolivia                                            caretaker governments, 100, 157
  fall of economic experts in, 12, 156,            Carranza, Luis, 101, 110
           158–160                                 Carrasquilla, Alberto, 82–83, 85
  importance of technocrats in, 154, 155           Castilla, Luis Miguel, 104–105, 110
  macroeconomic policy in, 159n3                   Cavallo, Domingo, 157, 160
  politicization of Bolivian Ministry of           Central Bank. See Banco de la República
           Economics, 62                                     (Central Bank; Colombia)
Bolivian Revolution, 159                           Central Bank (Peru), 103
Boloña, Carlos, 98, 99, 100, 108, 109, 138         Centro de Estudios sobre Desarrollo
Botero, Rodrigo, 32, 69, 77, 80n10, 86–87, 88                Económico (CEDE; Colombia),
Brazil                                                       79, 86
  cash transfer program in, 102                    Centro de Investigación de la Universidad del
  importance of technocrats in, 3, 154                       Pacífico (CIUP; Peru), 103, 113, 165
Brint, Steven, 4n3                                 Chávez, Hugo, 160–161
bureaucratic authoritarianism, 3                   Chicago Boys (Chile), 3, 154
bureaucratic independence, 37n1                    Chile
bureaucratic reform, in Peru, 98                     importance of technocrats in, 3, 154–155
business interests                                   powerful business coalitions under Pinochet,
  agents of business perspective, 28–33                      29, 29n5
  in Chile, influence of coalitions, 29, 29n5      Chilean health reform model, 138, 149
  in Colombia                                      cholera epidemic, 138
     and insulation of economic policy             Christian Democrats (Chile), 154
           making, 76                              CIEPLAN monks, 154
Index                                                                                         195

CIUP (Centro de Investigación de la                 CONPES (Consejo Nacional de Política
            Universidad del Pacífico; Peru), 103,             Económica y Social; Colombia),
            113, 165                                          68, 69
CLAS, 144                                           Consejo Gremial (Colombia), 84–85
clientelism                                         Consejo Nacional de Política Económica y
   in Colombia, 71–73, 127                                    Planeación (Colombia), 67–68
   in Venezuela, 160                                Consejo Nacional de Política Económica y
coffee industry (Colombia), 74, 75, 87                        Social (CONPES; Colombia), 68, 69
Collier, David, 13–14                               Consejo Nacional de Seguridad Social en
Colombia, 11, 12                                              Salud (National Council for
   active role of technocrats in, 41                          Social Security in Health;
   coffee industry in, 74, 75, 87                             Colombia), 122
   contrast with Peru economic                      constellation of stakeholders. See stakeholders
            case, 112–113                           Constitutional Court (Colombia), 124,
   discretionary funds for congressman in                     127–128
            exchange for reform, 69n4               Constitution of Peru, 1979, 91
   economic continuity in, 9, 166–167               corruption
   economic crisis in, 22–23, 28                       in Colombia, 127
   economic elites in, 29                              in Peru, 100, 137, 143
   economic officials in, 70t4.1                    Costa Bauer, Marino, 141–142
   export-oriented reform in, 32                    Costa Rica, 155
   first international mission of World Bank        Council of Ministers (Peru), 107
            to, 68n1                                crawling peg exchange rate, 69–70
   increase in importance of technocrats in, 3      CRES (Comisión de Regulación en Salud;
   industrial sector in, 32                                   Colombia), 130
   institution building in, 164                     crisis, appointment of experts during, 38, 43
   market reform in, 31, 75–76, 88                  cross-temporal analysis vs. static
   payoffs for institution building in, 164                   approach, 12
   reform of executive in, 68                       Currie, Lauchlin, 84
   second generation reforms under
            Gaviria, 119                            de Habich, Midori, 143
   technical complexity of economic sector          de la Rúa, Fernando, 157
            in, 55                                  democracies, and technocrats, 165–168
   technical consensus since National                 economic technocrats, 166–167
            Front, 57–58                              health technocrats, 166
   technocrat-business relationship, 31–32            and patronage politics, 167
   technocrat-IFI relationship in, 26                 power over politicians, 165–166
   types of government in, 14. See also eco-          responsiveness to citizen demands, 167
            nomic technocrats in Colombia;            role in connecting centers of knowledge
            health technocrats in Colombia                    with state, 168
Colombian Association of Health Purchaser             role in initiating reforms, 167
            Companies (Asociación Colombiana        democracy, defining, 14, 16
            de Empresas de Medicina Integral,       dependency theory, and external agents
            ACEMI; Colombia), 129                             perspective, 25
Colombian Medical Federation, 120–121               devaluation, in Colombia, 31, 68, 69–70, 74
Comisión de Regulación en Salud (CRES;              Dirección de Crédito Público (Directorate of
            Colombia), 130                                    Public Credit), 72–73
commerce sector, 155                                domestic structural perspective, 162
commercial law reform, in Peru, 98                  Duhalde, Eduardo, 157–158, 159, 160
Conaghan, Catherine, 101n6                          Durand, Francisco, 30
Concertación (Chile), 154–155
conditional loans, 24, 92, 106                      Echavarría, Juan José, 80n10
CONFIEP (Peru), 30                                  Echeverry, Juan Carlos, 71, 72, 79n8
196                                                                                      Index

economic crisis                                      recruitment process/informal career
  in Argentina, 157, 159                                  track, 71
  in Colombia, 22–23, 28, 68, 124                    reforms under Lleras Camargo, 67, 68
  instrumentalist theory on, 21–23                   reforms under Lleras Restrepo, 69–70
  in Mexico, 21–22                                   reforms under Michelsen, 70
  in Peru, 21–23, 28, 93, 97, 137                    reforms under Pastrana, 70
economic journals, peer reviewed, 79n9               reforms under Valencia, 68
economic technocrats in Colombia,                    role of Congress in, 68, 69, 72
           1958–2013, 9, 17                          strengthening of CONPES, 69
  business actors, alleged power of, 73–76           strengthening of NPD, 69
     and information asymmetry, 74                and market reform, 31, 75–76
     and insulation from business/political       and non-traditional exports, 74–75
           interests, 76                          strategies to maintain autonomy, 77–81
     and market reform, 75–76                        institutionalization, 77, 78
     and policy preferences vs. economic             scholarship programs, 78–79
           forces, 74                                strong epistemic community in
     and structural changes in economy, 74–75             economics, 79–80
  clientelism, 71–73                                 technical knowledge requirement for pol-
     and lack of rationalism of                           icy making, 77, 78
           politicians, 72–73                     technocrat-business relationship, 31
     and limiting political control over        economic technocrats in Peru, 17
           resources, 72                          in 1980s, 91–97, 154
     and restraints on incumbents, 73                and business groups’ lack of
  determinants of autonomy of, 81–88                      consensus, 96
     business associations, 84–86                    and business opposition to reforms, 95
     complexity of economic policy, 86–87            and constellation of stakeholders, 52,
     consensus among experts, 87–88                       94–95, 154
     constellation of stakeholders, 83–86            and IFIs support of reforms, 94
     cost of bad policy performance, 81–83           and lack of technical consensus,
     IFIs, 84                                             94, 95–97
     political parties, 83–84                        and obstacles to carrying out
     politics of policy factors, 81–86                    reforms, 92–93
     technical aspects of policy factors,            and political costs of bad decisions,
           81, 86–88                                      94, 154
  and devaluation, 1985, 31                          and political opposition to reforms, 95
  emergence/continuity of, factors in, 65–71         and political parties’ lack of consensus, 96
     appointments to Monetary Board, 70–71,          and politics of policy factors, 94–95, 154
           71t4.2                                    reasons for downfall of
     arguments for continuity, 70, 70t4.1                 technocrats, 94–97
     balance-of-payments crises and IMF, 68          and reform of ISI model, 91–92
     budget reform, 67                               and successful reforms, 93
     Central Bank reform, 67                         and Team Dynamo/MEF, 91–97
     creation of development investment           autonomy, reasons for, 105–112
           council, 67–68                            constellation of stakeholders, 109–111
     domestic reform role in, 67–68                  determinants in MEF, 107–112
     exchange rate, 69–70                            IFIs role, 106
     external leverage role in, 68                   implementation of market reforms, 106
     first generation of technocrats, 69             negative political consequences, 107–109
     international linkages, 68                      parliamentary coordination, 106
     NF pact, 66–67                                  political intervention in economic policy,
     patronage politics, 67                               106–107
     promotion of non-traditional                    politics of policy factors, 107–111
           exports, 68–69                            spending ministries, 107
Index                                                                                     197

      strategic actions in MEF after fall of        non-traditional exports, 68–69, 74–75
           Fujimori, 105–107                        overdependence on coffee exports, 87
      technical aspects of policy factors,       and Peru
           111–112                                  export-oriented economy, 98
      technical complexity, 111                     subsidies for non-traditional exports, 93
      technical consensus, 111–112             external agents perspective, 25
   and campaign promises, 166                  external structural perspective, 162
   economic ministers (1980–2013), 101t5.1
   rise/consolidation of neo-liberal           family planning
           (1990–2013), factors in, 97–105        in Colombia, 117
      autonomy, 9                                 in Peru, 143
      business interests, 99, 103–105          Federación Nacional de Cafeteros
      under Fujimori, 98–100                              (Colombia), 84–85
      IFIs, 98–99                              Fedesarrollo (Fundación para la Educación
      increased power of business sector, 62              Superior y el Desarrollo; Colombia),
      institutional reforms, 98                           41, 71, 79–80, 116, 126
      market reforms, 98–99                    Ferrero, Carlos, 102n7
      military ministers, 99–100               financial crisis. See economic crisis
      political insulation, 99, 101–103        Financing Health Services in Developing
education sectors, and technocrat                         Countries: An Agenda of Reform
           autonomy, 155                                  (World Bank), 58
El Comercio (Peru), 109                        Finnemore, Martha, 37
electoral incentives theory, and information   foreign investment, in Peru, 93
           asymmetry, 38                       French bureaucrats, and information
El Libano, 118                                            asymmetry, 37
El Salvador, importance of                     Freundt, Jaime, 138
           technocrats in, 154                 Fujimori, Alberto
El Tiempo, 128                                    commitment to economic continuity, 3,
empíricos, 86                                             108, 109
Empresas Prestadoras de Salud (EPS;               corruption scandal, 14, 100
           Colombia), 121, 130                    and economic crisis, 98–100
Empresas Prestadoras de Salud (EPS; Peru),        free insurance program for students, 142,
           142, 149                                       145, 146, 147, 148
entrenchment, defining, 4                         and health reform, 134, 137–143
epidemics, 46, 138, 150, 151                      and MEF, 90
epistemic community                               and pension reform, 106
   in Colombia, 79–80                          functional perspective, on importance of
   defining, 55–56                                        technocrats, 20
   specifications of, 56n6                     Fundación para la Educación Superior y el
EPS (Empresas Prestadoras de Salud;                       Desarrollo (Fedesarrollo; Colombia),
           Colombia), 121, 130                            41, 71, 79–80, 116, 126
EPS (Empresas Prestadoras de Salud; Peru),
           142, 149                            Galán Sarmiento, Augusto, 131
Equipo Cambio (Team Change; Colombia),         García, Alan
           120–122, 123–124, 126, 128, 131      and cash transfer program, 102
Escuela Nacional de Administración              and economic continuity, 1–2, 166
           (Colombia), 67                       and economic crisis, 107–108
Estrada Álvarez, Jairo, 29, 73                  failed reform by Tejada under, 136–137
exchange rate, crawling peg in Columbia,        new economic development model
           69–70. See also devaluation                  of, 96–97
exports                                         and SNIP, 102, 103
   and Colombia                                 technical commitment of, 101, 108,
      export-oriented reform in, 32                     109–110
198                                                                                     Index

Gaviria, Alejandro, and health reform, 38, 47,       growing complexity of health system, 124
         121, 124, 128–129, 132                      health expenditures, 116
Gaviria, César, 65, 73, 75–76                        health facility building, 117
Geddes, Barbara, 21, 49n4, 56, 162–163               health reforms, 116–117
Goldenberg, Isaac, 100                               insurance programs, 115, 117
Gómez, Héctor Abad, 116                              national health plan, 116
Gómez, Hernando, 69                                  policy under Lleras Restrepo, 116–117
Gray Molina, Fernando, 158                           political costs of bad health policy, 117
Grindle, Merilee, 40                                 politics of policy factors, 117–118
Grupo de Analisis para el Desarrollo                 public health experts at Ministry of
         (GRADE; Peru), 103, 113, 165                      Health, 116
Gutiérrez, Édgar, 69                                 resource allocation, 116
                                                     sewage infrastructure, 117
Haas, Peter M., 38                                   technical aspects policy factors, 118
Harvard Group, 122–123                               technical complexity, 118
“Harvard Report,” 122                                technical consensus, 118
Harvard School of Public Health, 126, 129            vaccinations, 117
Harvard Team, 126                                 in 1993–2013, 114, 119
health insurance, private, 117, 119–120,             changes under Samper, 123
          129–130, 138                               continuity after government change,
Health Promoting Enterprises (Empresas                     122–123
          Promotoras de Salud, EPS;                  contribution-based regime, 121, 122
          Colombia), 121                             criticism of Ley 100, 132
health sector                                        expansion of coverage, 121
  health expert-IFI relationship in, 27              Harvard Group, 122–123
  lack of politician awareness of complexity         health ministry approach, 120
          of reforms, 24                             increased leverage and saliency of experts,
  patronage resources, 46                                  121–122
  policy feedback, 46                                increased political cost of bad health
  primary health care, emergence of, 58                    policy in, 46
  private health insurance, 117, 119–120,            Ley 100, 121–122, 131
          129–130, 138                               policy under Santos, 124
  resource limitations, 59                           policy under Uribe, 123–124
  selective primary health care, emergence           primary health care approach, 119, 120
          of, 58                                     private participation approach, 119–120
  technical autonomy in, 9, 23                       reforms created new stakeholders, 62
  universal policies, shortcomings of, 58            reform under Gaviria, 119–120
  and upper and middle classes, 46.                  subsidized regime, 121, 122
          See also health technocrats in             Team Change (Equipo Cambio), 120–
          Colombia; health technocrats in Peru             122, 123–124, 126, 128, 131
Health Service Providers (Instituciones           autonomy and continuity of, factors in,
          Prestadoras de Servicios, IPS;                   125–132
          Colombia), 121                             alliances with domestic/foreign actors as
Health Social Security (Seguro Social de Salud,            strategy for, 126
          ESSALUD; Peru), 135                        clientelism and corruption, 127
health technocrats, lack of power, 2                 constellation of stakeholders, 125,
health technocrats in Colombia, 17–18                      128–130, 154
  in 1958–1974 (during National Front), 114,         creation of semi-autonomous offices as
          115–119                                          strategy for, 126
     constellation of stakeholders, 118              financial crisis effect on, 124
     family planning campaigns, 117                  growth of subsidized system, 127
     funding, 117, 118                               health system institutions, 131
Index                                                                                      199

     IFIs, 128–129                                      restructuring of OCE under, 143
     information asymmetry, 126                         technocrats become ministerial
     patients and civic groups, 130                          advisors, 138
     persistent autonomy over time, 27, 33              under Toledo, 143
     policy complexity, 115, 125, 130–131            epidemiology office of MINSA, 150, 151
     political costs of bad policy performance,      healthcare for poor persons, 140
          125, 127–128, 154                          Health Ministry before reform, 135–137
     politician dependence on experts, 131              decentralization of material/human
     politics of policy factors, 127–130                     resources, 136
     private health insurers/providers,                 economic crisis and corruption, 137
          129–130                                       failed reform by Tejada, 136–137
     technical aspects of policy factors,               low level of expertise, 136
          130–132                                       responsibilities of, 135–136
     technical consensus, 125, 131–132               IFIs declining interest in reform, 52, 151
     three strategies for building autonomy,         lack of politician awareness of technical
          125–126                                            complexity of reforms, 24
  contrast with Peru, 144, 147–148, 151              lack of public interest in health policy,
  politics of policy factors, 114–115                        147–148
     bad policy performance, 114–115                 limited autonomy/eventual demise of, fac-
     constellation of stakeholders, 115                      tors in, 134–135, 143–150
  present coverage of Colombians, 124                   complexity of health sector compared
  technocrat-IFI relationship, 27, 28                        with financial sector, 147
health technocrats in Peru, 18                          constellation of stakeholders, 144,
  autonomy of, 33                                            145–146, 151
  contrast with Colombia, 144, 147–148, 151             decline in influence of technocrats,
  and corruption, 143                                        141–143
  current coverage of Peruvians, 135–136                increasing complexity, 144, 146–147, 151
  emergence and stability (1990–2002), fac-             negative factors, 147–150
          tors in, 137–143                              political cost of bad performance, 144,
     approval of loans by IFIs and bilateral aid             147–148, 151
          agencies, 139                                 political insulation, 144–145
     autonomy from IFIs, 140–141                        positive factors, 145–147
     cholera epidemic, 138                              secrecy of actions of technocrats,
     evidence of autonomous action, 140–141                  144–145
     failure to achieve reform in line with             technical consensus, 144, 148–149, 151
          preferences, 141                           middle/upper class detachment from health
     free insurance program for students, 142                system, 148
     under Fujimori, 134, 137–143                    MINSA health infrastructure (1980–2002),
     under García, 143                                       141t7.1
     high ministerial/lower level personnel          persistent autonomy of health experts over
          turnover, 140                                      time, 27
     under Humala, 143                               primary health care, 140, 148
     neoliberal health reform project, 138           technocrat-IFI relationship in, 27
     political insulation, 140                       urban/middle class bias of health
     political interventions, 141–142                        system, 140
     poverty alleviation campaign, 139             Hirschman, Albert, 46
     privatization of health care, 141–142         Hommes, Rudolph, 72, 75–76, 88
     reasons for expansion of autonomy,            Huber, Evelyne, 48
          138–139                                  Humala, Ollanta
     reform plan of Vidal, 137–138, 149n7            appointment of pro-business technocrats,
     reform under OCE, 139–143                               104–105
     resource issues, 142                            and cash transfer program, 102
200                                                                                       Index

Humala, Ollanta (cont.)                               and economic reform in Colombia, 68, 76
  technical commitment of, 108, 109–110               and health reform in Colombia, 27, 116,
  and technical continuity, 1–2, 90, 101, 166                118, 129
Hume, María Jesús, 95                                 and health reform in Peru, 27, 136, 139,
Hurtado Miller, Juan Carlos, 98                              141, 142, 145, 148, 150, 151
hyperinflation, 45, 58                                and limits to borrowing in Peru, 93
  in Peru, 105, 112                                   as stakeholders, 50n5
                                                      and technocratic continuity, 61.
immunization programs, in Peru, 137, 139                     See also Inter-American Development
import licenses, eliminated except for                       Bank (IDB); International Monetary
          agricultural products in Colombia, 75              Fund (IMF); World Bank (WB);
import substitution industrialization (ISI)                  World Health Organization (WHO)
          model (Colombia), 74, 98                 International Monetary Fund (IMF), and
industrial sector                                            balance-of-payments crisis in
  in Colombia, 32                                            Colombia, 68
  in Peru, 32, 109                                 international organizations, and information
infant care, in Peru, 140                                    asymmetry, 37
information asymmetry, 37–38, 39                   IPSS (Instituto Peruano de Seguridad
  in Colombia, 74, 77, 78, 126                               Social, Peruvian Social Security
  and electoral incentives theory, 38                        Institute), 135
  and international organizations, 37              Islands of Efficiency (MINSA), 143
  and principal-agent theory, 37                   ISS (Instituto de Seguridad Social; Colombia),
infrastructure projects                                      115, 117, 118
  in Colombia, 117, 118                            Izquierda Unida (United Left; Peru), 96
  in Peru, 91–92, 93, 104                          Izquierdo, Jorge González, 92
“input” side of politics, 15
Institute of Social Security (Peru), 149           Japanese cooperation agency (OECF), 139
institutionalization, and technocratic             jargon, technical, 54
          autonomy in Colombia, 77, 78             Jensen, Brian, 92
institution building                               Johns Hopkins University, 150
  in Colombia, 164                                 Joy Way, Víctor, 100, 110–111
  in Peru, 98, 164–165                             judicial autonomy, pluralist theory on, 48
  significant payoffs for, 164–165                 Junguito, Roberto, 69, 72, 80n10, 85
  as source of technocratic autonomy, 41
Instituto de Seguridad Social (ISS; Colombia),     Kirchner, Cristina Fernandez de, 62, 158, 160
          115, 117, 118                            Kirchner, Néstor, 62, 158, 159, 160
instrumentalist theory, 19                         Krueger, Anne O., 28
  agents of business perspective, 28–33            Kuczynski, Pedro Pablo, 1, 102, 103–104
  agents of international financial institutions
          perspective, 25–28                       labor sectors, and technocrat autonomy, 155
  limitations, 3–4, 33–34                          labor unions, 45, 46
  political agents perspectives, 20–24             Lagos, Ricardo, 154–155
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB)              Lara, Jorge Ruíz, 69, 83
  courses and conferences by, 26                   Latin America, economic technocrats in
  and health reform in Colombia, 129                 early history of, 3
  and health reform in Peru, 139, 142, 145           fall of experts (other than Peru/Colombia),
International Cooperation Office (Oficina de                 155–156
          Cooperación Externa, OCE; Peru),              in Argentina, 156, 157–158, 159, 160
          134, 137, 138, 139–143                        in Bolivia, 156, 158–160
international financial institutions (IFIs)             politics of policy factors, 156
  agents of international financial institutions           constellation of stakeholders, 156,
          perspective, 25–28                                 159–160
Index                                                                                       201

         political costs of bad decisions,       MEF. See Ministry of Economics and Finance
            156, 159                                      (MEF; Peru)
      technical factors, 156                     Menem, Carlos, 157
         lack of technical consensus, 156, 160   Mesa, Carlos, 158–159
      in Venezuela, 156–157, 160–161             Mexico
   increase of importance of, 2, 3                autonomy of technocrats in, 40
Lavagna, Roberto, 157–158, 159, 160               cash transfer program in, 102
least likely cases, 11–12                         importance of technocrats in, 3, 154
Levitsky, Steven, 61                              and market reform in, 3
Ley 100 (Colombia), 121–122, 131                  neoliberal technocrats in, 21–22
   contribution-based regime, 121, 122           Meynaud, Jean, 37
   criticism of, 132                             Minister of Social Protection (Colombia), 123
   expansion of coverage, 121                    Ministry of Economics and Finance (MEF;
   subsidized regime, 121, 122                            Peru), 1, 23
Ley de Modernización de la Seguridad Social       and basic healthcare for poorest in
            en Salud (Peru), 144                          Peru, 139
Ley General de Salud (Peru), 144                  and cash transfer program, 102
Lineamientos de Política de Salud                 corruption scandal under Fujimori, 100
            (1995–2000) (Peru), 141               and health reform, 27, 142
linkages, 25–26, 68                               and hyperinflation and market
Lleras Camargo, Alberto                                   reform, 90–91
   control/rationalization of public              increasing expertise of, 100–101, 101t5.1
            expenditures under, 67                and infrastructure improvement, 104
   economic reforms under, 67, 68                 and limitation on public expenditure before
   increased importance of economic                       2006 election, 102
            technocrats under, 3                  and neoliberal health reform project, 138
   negotiations with IFIs under, 68               and neoliberal reforms/infrastructure
   use of health experts to advance health                development, 92–93
            reform goals of, 38                   Peruvians views of technocrats in, 97–98
Londoño, Beatrice, 124                            political insulation of technocrats, 99,
Londoño, Juan Luis, 114, 120–124, 125                     101–103
López Michelsen, Alfonso, 70, 84, 88              politicalization under Alan García, 96–97
Lora, Eduardo, 80n10                              political leverage diminishing after 1993
                                                          crisis, 99
M-19 (Colombia), 119, 120                         reduction of protective tariffs by, 104
Magaloni, Beatriz, 21–22                          and SIAF, 102
Mann, Michael, 49n3                               and SNIP, 101–102
market reform                                     and tax reform, 104
 in Argentina, 157                                use of press to deflect political threats, 107
 in Chile, 3                                     Ministry of Finance (MF; Colombia), 23
 in Colombia, 31, 75–76, 88                       education requirements for technocrats, 78
 in Mexico, 3                                     and international loans, 87
 in Peru, 29–30, 32, 90–91, 106                   technical consensus since National
MAS party (Bolivia), 159                                  Front, 57–58
maternal care, in Peru, 140                       technical excellence of, 65
maternal-infant insurance program (Seguro        Ministry of Health (Mimsteno de Salud,
         Materno-Infantil; Peru), 142                     MINSA; Peru)
media                                             administrative duties taken over by regions,
 depiction of Alva Orlandini, 96n3                        135n2
 and second Colombian health episode, 46          epidemiology office of, 150, 151
 use by MEF to deflect political threats, 107     under Fujimori, 134
 use by technocrats to further own policy, 41     health infrastructure (1980–2002), 141t7.1
202                                                                                    Index

Ministry of Health (Mimsteno de Salud,           North, Douglass, 7, 61
         MINSA; Peru) (cont.)                    NPD. See National Planning Department
 influence of health technocrats within, 2               (NPD; Colombia)
 Islands of Efficiency, 143
 poverty alleviation programs, 146               Ocampo, José Antonio, 80n10, 88
 project budgets, 139n3                          OCE (Oficina de Cooperación Externa
 before reform, 135–137                                  (International Cooperation Office;
    decentralization of material and human               Peru), 134, 137, 138, 139–143
         resources, 136                          Ochoa, Luis Carlos, 116
    economic crisis and corruption, 137          O’Donnell, Guillermo, 3, 15, 40
    failed reform by Tejada, 136–137             OECF (Japanese cooperation agency), 139
    low expertise, 136                           Ordóñez, Antonio, 114, 116–117
    low level of expertise, 136                  Organizaciones de Servicios de Salud
    responsibilities of, 135–136                         (Peru), 138
Ministry of Social Protection, 123               OSS project (1991; Peru), 141–142, 149
MINSA. See Ministry of Health (Mimsteno de       “output” side of politics, 15, 161
         Salud, MINSA; Peru)
MNR (Movimiento Nacionalista                     Pacto de Punto Fijo (Venezuela), 62
         Revolucionario; Bolivia), 158           Pact of Sitges (Colombia), 67
Monetary Board (Colombia), 32, 68, 76            PAHO. See Pan American Health Organization
Montenegro, Santiago, 83                                   (PAHO)
Morales, Evo, 62, 158, 159–160                   Palacio, Diego, 123–124
more likely cases, 12                            Pan American Health Organization (PAHO)
Movimiento Nacionalista Revolucionario             and health reform in Colombia, 27, 118
         (MNR; Bolivia), 158                       and health reform in Peru, 27, 137, 141
Murillo, María Victoria, 61                        and preventative health, 116
                                                   and selective primary health care, 148
National Association of Coffee Growers           Paniagua, Valentin, commitment to economic
          (ANC; Colombia), 30                              stability, 108–110
National Council for Social Security in Health   Paredes, Nelcy, 123
          (Consejo Nacional de Seguridad         Paredes, Victor, 138
          Social en Salud; Colombia), 122        Paris Club, 139
National Federation of Coffee Growers, 86        PARS (Programa de Apoyo a la Reforma en
National Front (NF; Colombia)                              Salud; Colombia), 123, 125, 126
  health experts during, 115–119                 PARSALUD (Programa de Apoyo a la
  restricted electoral competition during, 14              Reforma de Salud; Peru), 142
National Front pact (1958–1974); Colombia,       Partido dos Trabalhadores (Brazil), 155
          65, 66–67                              Partido Popular Cristiano (PPC; Peru), 92, 96
National Planning Department (NPD;               Partido Revolucionario Institucional (PRI;
          Columbia), 23, 84                                Mexico)
  education requirements for technocrats, 78       commitment to responsible economic
  increased power/technical capacity of,                   policy, 21–22
          65, 67                                   and importance of technocrats, 3
  institutionalization of, 78                      and market reform, 3
  as research center, 79                           and technocrat autonomy, 40
  scholarship programs for technocrats, 78       Pastrana, Andrés, 123
National Planning Office. See National           Pastrana, Misael, 70, 83–84, 88, 117
          Planning Department (NPD;              patronage politics
          Colombia)                                vs. benefits of collective goods, 21–22
National School of Management                      vs. benefits of policy reforms, 21
          (Colombia), 76                           in Colombia, 67
nongovernmental agencies (NGOs), and health        and democracies, 16–17, 167
          reform in Peru, 146                      and health sector, 46
Index                                                                                      203

  patronage resources, 21, 23, 43                pluralist theory, on judicial autonomy, 48
  restraints on use of resources, 3              pockets of efficiency, 21, 38
Paz Estenssoro, Víctor, 158                      policy makers, practical lessons for, 163–165
Paz Zamora, Víctor, 158                            levels of success vary across state areas,
PDVSA (Petroléos de Venezuela), 62, 156–157,                163–164
          160–161                                  significant payoffs for institution building,
pension reform, in Peru, 98, 106, 107, 111                  164–165
Perry, Guillermo, 69, 80n10, 88                  policy making analysis, limits of electoral
Peru, 11, 12                                                incentives/structural theory in,
  bureaucratic reform in, 98                                161–163
  career path of technocrats, link to private      political incentive theory, 161–163
          business, 103–104                        structural theory, 162–163
  contrast with Colombia economic case,               domestic structural perspective, 162
          112–113                                     external structural perspective, 162.
  economic crisis in, 21–23, 28, 93, 97, 137                See also technocratic autonomy
  family planning in, 143                                   theory
  hyperinflation in, 45, 58                      policy sector, strength of technocrat
  immunization programs, in Peru, 137, 139                  autonomy in, 5
  increased importance of economic               political agents perspectives, 20–24
          technocrats in, 3                        on economic abundance and
  industrial sector in, 32                                  expenditures, 101
  institution building in, 98, 164–165             and economic crises, 22–23
  market reform in, 29–30, 32, 90–91, 106          and good economic times, 23
  neoliberal reforms/infrastructure develop-       limitations, 22–24
          ment in, 92–93                              experts’ restraint of key political
  pension reform in, 98, 106, 107, 111                      interests, 22–23
  poverty alleviation programs in, 146                explanation for initial appointment of
  privatization of state enterprises in, 93,                technocrats, 24
          98, 99                                      politicians ignorance of technical
  technical complexity of economic sector                   procedures/complex reforms, 23–24
          in, 55                                   patronage-oriented politics, 21–22
  technocrat-business relationship in, 32–33       patronage resources, 21, 23
  technocrat-IFI relationship in, 26–27, 28        power of appointment/dismissal, 21
  types of government in, 14                       reasons to delegate power to
  variation in economic policy over time,                   technocrats, 20–22
          57–58. See also economic techno-            during debt crisis, 21–22
          crats in Peru; health technocrats in        long-term electoral interests, 20
          Colombia                                    protect foreign investment, 22
Perú Posible, 1, 102–103, 107, 143               political incentive theory, 161–163
Peruvian Academy of Health, 149                  Políticas y Plan de Salud 90–95,
Peruvian Social Security Institute (Instituto    Polo Democrático (Colombia), 132
          Peruano de Seguridad Social,           Pontificia Universidad Católica del Perú, 92
          IPSS), 135                             POS (Plan Obligatorio de Salud; Colombia),
Petroléos de Venezuela (PDVSA), 62, 156–157,                121, 123, 128
          160–161                                positive feedback, 45
PFSS (Programa de Fortalecimiento de             power of appointment of politicians, 21
          Servicios de Salud; Peru), 140, 142    power theory, 14–17
Pierson, Paul, 45                                  and democracies, 15–16
Piñera, Sebastián, 154–155                         on output side of politics, 15
Pinilla, Gustavo Rojas, 66, 117                    on variation of capacity, 15
Pinochet, Augusto, 3, 29, 29n5                   PPC (Partido Popular Cristiano; Peru), 92, 96
Plan Obligatorio de Salud (POS; Colombia),       PREC (Programa de Especialización en
          121, 123, 128                                     Epidemiología de Campo; Peru), 150
204                                                                                         Index

press. See media                                   Salinas, Carlos, 3, 154
primary health care                                Samper, Ernesto, 88
  in Colombia, 119, 120                               and health reform, 122, 123, 132
  emergence of, 58                                    and market reform, 88
  in Peru, 140, 148, 149                           Sánchez de Lozada, Gonzalo “Goni,” 158
  selective, 58, 148                               Santa María, Mauricio, 71, 124
principal-agent theory, and information            Santos, Juan Manuel, 65, 128
          asymmetry, 37                            Schamis, Héctor, 29–30
private health insurance                           Schneider, Ben Ross, 22
  in Colombia, 117, 119–120, 129–130               scholarship programs for technocrats, 78–79
  in Peru, 138                                     school insurance program (SEG; Peru), 142,
privatization of state enterprises, in Peru, 93,             145, 146, 147, 148
          98, 99                                   second generation reforms, in Colombia, 119
pro-business technocrats, 104–105                  secrecy, 74, 144–145
Programa de Apoyo a la Reforma de Salud            Seguro Integral de Salud (SIS; Peru), 135
          (PARSALUD; Peru), 142                    selective primary health care, 58, 148, 149
Programa de Apoyo a la Reforma en                  semi-authoritarian regimes, 3
          Salud (PARS; Colombia), 123,             sewage systems
          125, 126                                    in Colombia, 117
Programa de Especialización en Epidemiología          in Peru, 138
          de Campo (PREC; Peru), 150               Shining Path (Peru), 18, 93, 97, 139
Programa de Fortalecimiento de Servicios de        SIAF (Sistema Integrado de Administración
          Salud (PFSS; Peru), 140, 142                       Financiera; Peru), 102
Programa de Salud y Nutrición Báica (PSNB          Silva, Eduardo, 29n5
          and Proyecto 2000; Peru), 139, 140       Silva Ruete, Javier, 100, 106, 108–109
Programa Juntos (Peru), 102                        SIS (Seguro Integral de Salud; Peru), 135
Programa Salud Básica para Todos (PSBT;            Sistema Integrado de Administración
          Peru), 139, 144                                    Financiera (SIAF; Peru), 102
protective tariffs                                 Sistema Nacional de Inversión Pública
  in Colombia, 75                                            (National System of Public
  in Peru, 104                                               Investment, SNIP; Peru), 101–102,
PSBT (Programa Salud Básica para Todos;                      103, 111
          Peru), 139, 144                          social legitimacy, 36–37
PSNB and Proyecto 2000 (Programa de Salud          social policy sectors, and technocrat
          y Nutrición Báica; Peru), 139, 140                 autonomy, 155
                                                   Solari, Luis, 143
Quiroga, Jorge, 158                                special insurance systems (Cajas de
                                                             Compensación Familiar;
rationality of politicians, 72–73                            Colombia), 117
regime types, and technocrats, 165–168             stakeholders
  authoritarian regimes, 165                          defining, 47–48
  democracies, 165–168                                and fall of economic technocrats in Peru,
  link between, 165                                          94–95, 154
Renjifo, Santiago, 116                                and fall of health technocrats in Peru, 144,
research design, present study, 11–13                        145–146, 151
Restrepo, Carlos Lleras, 3, 65, 69–70,                and fall of technocrats in Latin America
          116–117                                            (other than Colombia/Peru), 156,
revolution from above (1968; Peru), 3                        159–160
Riesman, David, 48                                    and health technocrats in Colombia, 62,
Rodríguez, Iván, 99                                          115, 118, 125, 128–130, 154
Rodríguez Pastor, Carlos, 93                          and monitoring of economic appointments
Rustow, Dankwart, 48                                         in Peru, 109–111
Index                                                                                          205

   plural and balanced constellation of, 7–8,            political opposition, 49–50
          10t1.2. See also business interests;           socioeconomic interests/international
          international financial institutions                actors, 50
          (IFIs); technocratic autonomy theory        determinants of technical autonomy, 42–60
Stallings, Barbara, 26                                expertise as source of autonomy, 36–42, 152
static approach, 12                                      alliance building strategy, 41
Steiner, Roberto, 86                                     diversion of political/socioeconomic
strong structural perspective, 29                             pressures from policy areas, 40–41
structural theory, limitations of, 162–163               effectiveness as political resource, 36–37
   domestic structural perspective, 162                  exclusion of actors without technical
   external structural perspective, 162                       training strategy, 40
SUNAT (Peru), 104                                        four strategies to maintain and strengthen
Superintendencia de Salud (Colombia), 130                     influence, 40–41
Superintendencia Financiera (Colombia), 130              institution building strategy, 41
                                                         leverage expertise provides to its
tariffs                                                       user, 37–38
   protective in Colombia, 75                            scarcity of professional politicians, 39
   protective in Peru, 104                               short tenure in office of ministers, effect
   reduction in Colombia, 75                                  on, 39
   reduction in Peru, 93, 98, 104                        technical asymmetry, 39
tax reform, in Peru, 98, 104                          health vs. economic technocrats, 153–154
Team Change (Equipo Cambio; Colombia),                political cost of bad policy performance,
           120–122, 123–124, 126, 128, 131                    43–47, 44t3.1, 152–153
Team Dynamo (Peru), 90, 91–97                            during crisis, 44–45
technocracy, definition of, 16                           decisions affecting larger number of
technocratic autonomy theory                                  population, 44
   active role of experts in securing                    and economic sector, 45
           autonomy, 40                                  and health sector, 46
   applications to areas in Latin America other          patronage resources, 43
           than economics/healthcare, 155–156            severity of potential damage, 44
   applications to fall of experts in Latin              and upper and middle classes, 44, 45–46
           America, 156–161                              visibility/traceability of potential
   applications to Latin America other than                   consequences, 44
           Peru and Colombia, 154–155                 politics of policy factors, 42–53, 152–153
   conclusions, 63                                    technical aspects of policy, 53–60, 153
   consensus among experts, 55–60,                       as not as important as politics of
           57t3.4, 153                                        policy, 60
      as constraint on appointments by                technical complexity, 53–55, 54t3.3, 153
           politicians, 56                               of economic policy, 54, 55
      determining consensus levels, 56–57                of health policy, 55
      effects of lack of consensus, 56                   and types of knowledge, 54
      explains variation in economic                  variation in agency capacity, 155–156
           sector, 57–58                              variation in degree of autonomy across
      explains variation in health                            policy areas, 152–153
           sector, 58–59                              variation of technical autonomy across time/
   constellation of stakeholders, 47–53, 51t3.2,              policy areas, 41–42, 152
           152–153                                    vulnerability of technical autonomy,
      continuity of autonomy in economic                      42, 60–63
           sector, 50–51                                 and constellation of stakeholders, 61, 62
      effective strategies to advance                    and political costs of bad policy
           preferences, 52–53                                 performance, 61, 62
      and health sector, 50, 51–52                 technocratic democracies, defining, 2
206                                                                                        Index

technocrats, overview of                           and political costs of economic policy, 82–83
   as agenda setters, 5, 22, 35                    technical experts under, 65–66, 73, 81
   alliances of, 40                              Urrutia, Miguel, 69, 71–72, 80n10
   defining, 13–14                               USAID
   policy preferences, advancing, 5.               and health reform in Peru, 139, 150
           See also autonomy of technocrats,       and health spending in Colombia, 116, 118
           overview of; technocratic autonomy
           theory                                vaccination program, in Peru, 117
Teichman, Judith, 30                             Valencia, Guillermo León, 68
Tejada, David, 136–137, 149n7                    Vargas Llosa, Mario, 98
textile industry, in Peru, 104                   Velasco Alvarado, Juan, 91
think tanks                                      Venezuela
   in Colombia, 41, 71, 79–80, 116, 126            clientelism in, 160
   influence of, 80n10                             fall of technocrats in state oil company in,
   in Peru, 103, 146, 151                                  12, 62, 156–157, 160–161
Toledo, Alejandro, 100–101                       Vidal, Carlos, 137–138, 149n7
   and cash transfer program, 102
   and limitation on public expenditure before   weak structural perspective, 29–30
           2006 election, 102                    Webb, Richard, 95
   and public sector salary increases, 103       Weber, Max, 36, 37, 167
   “silent opposition to,” 1                     Wiesner, Eduardo, 82
   and SNIP, 102                                 World Bank (WB)
   technical commitment of, 108, 109–110           courses and conferences by, 26
Tono, Teresa, 131                                  first international mission to Colombia, 68n1
tuberculosis (TB) program, in Peru, 137, 139       and health reform in Colombia, 27, 129
Turbay Ayala, César, 65, 73, 81–82                 and health reform in Peru, 27, 136, 139,
                                                            141, 145, 151
Ugarte, Óscar, 143                                 limitations of, 164
Ulloa, Manuel, 91, 92, 93                          and restricted selective primary health care, 58
UNICEF, 118, 148                                 World Development Report: Investing in
Unidad Nacional (Peru), 107                                 Health (World Bank), 58
unions, 45, 46                                   World Health Organization (WHO)
United Left (Izquierda Unida; Peru), 96            and health reform in Colombia, 27
United Nations Population Fund (UNFP)              and health reform in Peru, 27, 148
  and health reform in Colombia, 27                and primary health care, 58
  and health reform in Peru, 27, 141
Universidad Cayetano Heredia (Peru), 137         Yamamoto, Víctor, 138
Universidad de Los Andes (Colombia), 71,         Yepes, Francisco, 116
         79, 86                                  Yong Motta, Eduardo, 141
University of Alabama, 137
Uribe, Álvaro                                    Zavala, Fernando, 102
  and health reform, 123–124, 127–128            Zedillo, Ernesto, 3
  importance of stakeholders to, 85–86           Zuluaga, Oscar, 85–86
